

--- PAGE 1 ---

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8386–8411
November 12-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics
Stepwise Verification and Remediation of Student Reasoning Errors
with Large Language Model Tutors
Nico Daheim∗1 Jakub Macina∗2,3
Manu Kapur4 Iryna Gurevych1 Mrinmaya Sachan2
1Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP Lab), Department of Computer Science
and Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI), TU Darmstadt
2Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 3ETH AI Center
4Professorship for Learning Sciences and Higher Education, ETH Zurich
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) present an op-
portunity to scale high-quality personalized ed-
ucation to all. A promising approach towards
this means is to build dialog tutoring models
that scaffold students’ problem-solving. How-
ever, even though existing LLMs perform well
in solving reasoning questions, they struggle
to precisely detect student’s errors and tailor
their feedback to these errors. Inspired by real-
world teaching practice where teachers iden-
tify student errors and customize their response
based on them, we focus on verifying student
solutions and show how grounding to such ver-
ification improves the overall quality of tutor
response generation. We collect a dataset of
1K stepwise math reasoning chains with the
first error step annotated by teachers. We show
empirically that finding the mistake in a stu-
dent solution is challenging for current models.
We propose and evaluate several verifiers for
detecting these errors. Using both automatic
and human evaluation we show that the student
solution verifiers steer the generation model
towards highly targeted responses to student
errors which are more often correct with less
hallucinations compared to existing baselines.
https://github.com/eth-lre/
verify-then-generate
1 Introduction
The field of dialog tutoring aims to build systems
that can teach students by holding a conversation
with them (Wollny et al., 2021; Jurenka et al., 2024).
Dialog tutors hold the potential to make personal-
ized teaching available to learners anywhere any-
time. The increasing capabilities of LLMs have
brought renewed hope to this field (Thoppilan
et al., 2022; Jurenka et al., 2024). However, real-
time tutoring is quite complex, and human teachers
bring various intricate capabilities when teaching,
*Equal contribution.
such as identifying student errors in problem solv-
ing, picking a pedagogical strategy, and commu-
nicating it (Bommasani et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2024b). The same requirements hold for dialog
tutoring models which need all these abilities to be
effective.
Yet, although research on effective human tu-
tors shows they perform these steps sequentially
by first reasoning about the error, then picking a
strategy, and then responding (Lepper and Woolver-
ton, 2002), many tutoring models perform all of
them in one forward pass. Recent studies (Macina
et al., 2023b,a) have shown that this can lead to sev-
eral deficiencies that can be detrimental to student
learning, for example, in math tutoring. Despite
impressive performance on math reasoning bench-
marks (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021),
dialog tutors often generate hallucinated outputs
and present erroneous information to students, for
example, because they assess an incorrect solution
as correct. We show an example of this in Figure 1.
In this paper, we alleviate this problem by de-
coupling the verification of student solutions from
response generation with a modular approach. As
opposed to the common approach, the model does
not directly generate the tutor response from the
students’ utterances, whereby solution assessment
is done implicitly in the models’ activations, but
rather receives the output of an additional verifica-
tion model that assesses solutions and can therefore
also be more specialized. We hypothesize that this
increases the correctness of the model as well as
makes the response more targeted to the error be-
cause the response generation module is already
aware of the exact student error. Furthermore, this
architecture more closely mimics human tutors.
To test our approach and train verifiers, we col-
lect a dataset of ca. 1k student solutions and their
stepwise reasoning chains in the domain of multi-
step math problem-solving, which we released pub-
licly. This dataset augments the math dialog tu-
8386

--- PAGE 2 ---

Problem
Dialogue History
Justin has a box that is 6 inches in height and the width
is 4 inches. The length of the box is double its height.
What is the volume of the box?
Student
We set an equation 2 * length = 6, so length is 3. The
volume is 6 * 4 * 3 = 72. I think the answer is 72. 
Teacher
If the height is 6, what is the length of the box?
Volume of a box is height * width * length.
Student
Multi-turn dialog tutoring task
Goal: Generate next teacher utterance.
Not quite. Is the length you
computed 2-times more
than height?targeted and correct
A. Error reason (baseline): Student made a careless mistake. 
B. Correctness verification: incorrect
C. Stepwise verification: Step 2 - We set an equation 2 * length = 6 ...
D. Error Description: length is used as a label instead of a variable     
     representing the number. 
E. Alignment: Missing student steps: We know height is 6,... 
   Matching steps are: Next we know length...<=>We set an equation...
2. Verification-based
Conditional Generation Model
Equation is height * width * length.Volume of a box is 
height * width * length.
We set an equation
2 * length = 6, so length is 3. 
Next we know length = 2 * height, so
length is 12. 
Student Reasoning Chain-of-Thought (CoT) Solution
The volume is 6 * 4 * 3 = 72.We know height is 6, width is 4, and
we found the length is 12.
So the volume is 6 * 4 * 12 = 288.I think the answer is 72.
Great work, this is
correct!
factually incorrect
Conditional Generation
Model (baseline)
Targeted
Correct
Actionable
1. Stepwise 
verification
+ 
—
Figure 1: Directly generating a tutor response based on the conversation history can lead to hallucinations (bottom
left). To alleviate this, we split this process into two sequential tasks (right): 1) A model identifies the student’s
mistake. 2) A different response generation model communicates the identified mistake. We use different verifiers:
providing the Error Reason (Wang et al., 2024b), Classification-based Verification, providing a more detailed Error
Description and a Step Alignment of student and reference solution. Especially the latter two reduce hallucinations
and make tutor models more targeted at the student error when verification and generation are combined (Section 6).
toring corpus MathDial (Macina et al., 2023a),
which we use for evaluating dialog tutoring mod-
els, by teacher-annotated verifications of the first
erroneous step in the student solution (Section 4).
We propose three verification approaches based
on prompting and finetuning language models. Be-
sides a simple classification-based approach for
verification, we also generate a textual verification
and notably align student solution steps to steps
of a reference solution (Section 3.1) to verify the
student solution. We find that using our data for
finetuning helps smaller LLMs surpass prompted
state-of-the-art LLMs. Furthermore, incorporating
the verification output in the response generation
step (Section 3.2) clearly improves their perfor-
mance in terms of both extensive automatic (Sec-
tion 6) and human evaluation using real teachers
(Section 6.3): the generated responses are more
targeted to the exact student error, there are less
hallucinations, and there is more actionable scaf-
folding feedback for the student. In general, we
find that such improvements are much stronger
when the verification output is correct (Section 7.1)
indicating a large potential for the community to
improve dialog tutors by adding verifiers.
2 Background & Related Work
Problem formulation Dialog tutoring systems
aim to tutor students by holding a conversation with
them. Formally, the goal of dialog tutoring is to
continue a tutoring dialog consisting of a sequence
ofT−1 turnsH := (u1,..., uT−1) taken by either
student or teacher. Each ut∈V∗is constructed
from a fixed model vocabulary V. Continuation
then means generating a new utterance uT ∈V∗.
Often there is also background knowledge that is
either required or helpful to tutor a certain concept,
such as grammar rules (Stasaski et al., 2020), or
textbook knowledge (Wang et al., 2024a), and can
be used to ground uT . In this work, we deal with
teaching math word problem-solving and therefore
use textual knowledge k∈V∗, for instance, the
math word problem and background knowledge
like math rules or a reference solution.
Rule-based dialog tutoring Tutoring systems
should guide students to solving a problem (e.g. an
MWP or translation of a phrase) not by telling the
solution outright, but rather by using scaffolding
techniques that give students space for guided ex-
ploration and self-correction. For example, the tu-
tor might elicit the students’ thinking with Socratic
questions (Shridhar et al., 2022) or sense-making
questions that challenge their understanding of the
problem (Reiser, 2004; Anghileri, 2006).
Capturing such intricate tutoring strategies is
hard and requires teachers years to master. Due to
this complexity, most previous intelligent tutoring
systems were human-authored, notably the Auto-
Tutor family (Nye et al., 2014), LISP tutor (An-
derson et al., 1985) which uses a large set of rules
to verify student programming solutions, or any
systems built using example-tracing tutors which
8387

--- PAGE 3 ---

requires enumerating all possible solutions or writ-
ing complex production rules (Aleven et al., 2016).
However, scaling such human-authored systems
can quickly explode in both complexity and human
effort (Macina et al., 2023b). Due to this and rapid
progress in language generation from learning large
models based on large amounts of data, LLMs such
as LearnLM (Jurenka et al., 2024) have recently
become popular in favor of human-authored, rule-
based systems.
LLM-based dialog tutoring Recently, LLM-
based dialog tutors have become more popular as
a means to tutor human students through a con-
versation with an LLM. For example, dialog tutor-
ing has been proposed for second-language acqui-
sition (Stasaski et al., 2020; Caines et al., 2020;
Kwon et al., 2024), to answer questions in sci-
ence (Chevalier et al., 2024), or to solve math
word problems (MWPs) (Macina et al., 2023a;
Pal Chowdhury et al., 2024) To train such models,
both human-collected data (Stasaski et al., 2020;
Caines et al., 2022; Macina et al., 2023a) and syn-
thetic data (Sonkar et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a),
as well as a combination of both (Jurenka et al.,
2024) can be used. Using these, a simple approach
is training a model to generate the teacher response
directly by pairing the following model, parameter-
ized by weights θ, with a decoding algorithm, such
as beam search or greedy decoding:
pθ(y|H, k) =
|y|∏
i=1
pθ(yi|y<i,H, k). (1)
This model is straightforward to implement and
learn from data but prior work has shown that
it suffers from generating factually incorrect out-
puts (Macina et al., 2023a). Therefore, in this work
we break down response generation into two steps:
verification, where it is first assessed whether the
student solution is correct, and generation.
Verification Verification is challenging in its
own right and has recently been tackled for
general reasoning problems. For example,
ROSCOE (Golovneva et al., 2023) presents unsu-
pervised metrics to assess the correctness of a mod-
els’ chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning, and (Jacovi
et al., 2024) evaluate open-domain question answer-
ing for logical errors. The outputs of verifiers have
subsequently also been used for self-refinement of
LLMs (Madaan et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2024) and
also allow targeted feedback for the training of stu-
dent LLMs with teacher LLMs (Saha et al., 2023).
Closely related to our work (Wang et al., 2024b)
define broad error categories, such as miscalcula-
tion, to understand the cause of incorrect reasoning
by students and condition on it to generate teacher
responses. We compare to this baseline and call it
Error Reason.
3 Verification-based Response Generation
We first introduce the task of verification and dif-
ferent verifiers in Section 3.1. Afterwards, in Sec-
tion 3.2, we combine verification and response gen-
eration for modular tutor response generation.
3.1 Verification
We deal with the verification of student solutions to
a given math word problem q∈V∗. The solutions
can be described by a sequence of substep solutions
sq ={s1,...,sN}, where each sn∈V∗and sN is
the final solution. Usually, sq is described by the
student in one of the student utterancesut. The task
of the model is to assess whether sN is the correct
solution to q and if not, potentially, to identify
which step sn caused the error. Oftentimes, this
can be done by comparing to a reference solution
ˆsq ={ˆs1,...,ˆsM}that is either given or model-
generated and might differ in length. All verifiers
which we discuss next can then be described by a
learned functionvθ′(v|sq, ˆsq), usually an LLM.
Here, v is the verification output and ˆsq may be an
empty string if no reference solution is given. In
the following, we introduce different verifiers.
Classification-based Verification A compara-
bly simple approach to verification is classifying
whether the whole student solution sq is correct us-
ing a binary classifier. We call thisOverall Verifi-
cation. Similarly, identifying the first error step sn
can be framed as multi-class classification based on
all student solution steps with labels{0,...,N},
where 0 means no mistake. We call this Stepwise
Verification. Alternatively, Stepwise Verification
(iterative) can be framed as a binary classification
just for each step sn whether it is correct or not.
The first error step is the first step classified as an
error.
Error Description While conceptually easy,
classification-based approaches locate the first er-
ror without explaining the exact issue. Therefore,
we propose to use an LLM to directly describe
8388

--- PAGE 4 ---

Algorithm 1 Modified Needleman-Wunsch.
Require: Solution attempt sq ={s1, ...,sN}
Require: Reference solution ˆsq ={ˆs1, ...,ˆsM}
Require: Gap utility c, similarity threshold t, penalty p
Ensure: Optimal alignment of sq and ˆsq
1: F←zeros_matrix(M + 1, N+ 1) ▷ initialize
2: F [1 : M + 1,0]←[i·c for i in 1 . . . M]
3: F [0,1 : N + 1]←[i·c for i in 1 . . . N]
4: for i←1 to M do
5: eˆsm←embed(ˆsm)
6: for j←1 to N do
7: eˆsn←embed(sn)
8: F [i, j]←cosine_similarity(eˆsm ,esn )
9: if F [i, j]≥t then ▷ exact match
10: F [i, j]←F [i−1, j−1] + F [i, j]
11: else ▷ near match or gap
12: F [i, j] ←max(F [i−1, j−1]−p +
F [i, j], F[i−1, j] + c, F[i, j−1] + c)
13: end if
14: end for
15: end for
16: a ={(a1,ˆa1), ...,(aL,ˆaL)}←backtrack(F,sq,ˆsq)
17: return Globally-optimal alignment a
the error, and the concrete first error step, in a tex-
tual format, and call this Error Description. We
prompt the LLM with the prompt outlined in Ap-
pendix G. In comparison to Wang et al. (2024b),
this error description is allowed to be free-form
and does not map to predefined error types. This
makes our method more flexible and easy to apply
to new domains, especially if these are captured in
the LLM’s pretraining data. The LLM-generated
error step description can then be passed to a tutor
response generation model.
(Step) Alignment As our third verification ap-
proach, we align the steps in the student’s solution
with a reference solution, and compare the steps
in the student and reference solution to localize
errors. We call this approach Step Alignment. As
the order of steps in the solutions matters, a greedy
algorithm that finds the most similar steps across
the two solutions is insufficient. Thus, we frame
verification as a sequence alignment problem. In-
tuitively, our goal is to find an alignment, where
the aligned steps are as similar as possible while
allowing missing and additional steps in the student
solution to capture all error types.
The input to the alignment algorithm is the
student solution sq with N steps and the refer-
ence solution ˆsq with M steps. Note that here
we are aligning solution steps which can be long
strings. This is different from other sequence align-
ment problems in NLP, where typically tokens are
aligned (Paolini et al., 2021, inter alia). The output
is a sequence of tuples{(a1, ˆa1),...,(aL, ˆaL)}of
lengthL, where (al, ˆal) means that student solu-
tion step al is aligned to reference solution step ˆal.
Each al and ˆal can be either a step of sq and ˆsq,
respectively, or a special symbol⊘. Here, al =⊘
indicates a missing step in the student solution (−)
and ˆsl =⊘indicates an additional step (+).
In our implementation, we use the Needleman-
Wunsch (NW) algorithm (Needleman and Wunsch,
1970) as it guarantees an optimal alignment with
respect to a chosen utility function. We modify
the algorithm for semantic sequence alignment and
use sentence embeddings (Reimers and Gurevych,
2019) to measure the similarity between steps. We
detail our adaptation of the NW algorithm in Algo-
rithm 1 and describe each step in the following.
The NW algorithm iterates over all possible pairs
of substeps from sq and ˆsq by constructing a grid
over them and calculating a utility for each pair in
the grid. The path through this grid from beginning
to end with highest utility is then chosen as the
alignment. Since each substep is a string, we use
semantic string similarity measured by the cosine
similarity of the contextual embeddings of the sub-
steps as utility. In our experiments, this performed
better than just matching the final numerical so-
lution of the substeps which can struggle to align
incorrect steps (cf. Section 7.1 for results and a
comparison of embedding models).
We distinguish three cases. If the similarity of a
pair is at least as large as a threshold t, we count
it as an exact match and add the pairs’ similarity
to the similarity of its predecessors. In such cases,
we are certain that the student and reference solu-
tion steps match. In some cases, we might be less
certain and would ideally reflect the uncertainty in
reduced utility. If the similarity is smaller than t,
we still count pairs as a near match if subtracting
a penalty (that indicates non-exact match) leads to
a larger value than using a predefined gap utility
c. In this case, we add the similarity to the prede-
cessor similarities but discount it by the penaltyp
(in our case set to -1). Otherwise, the gap utility
c is added to either a pair of the previous student
and current reference solution step, or a pair of
the current student and previous reference solution
step. This enables missing and additional steps
in the student solution but how often they appear
can be controlled via the hyperparameter c. Al-
together, this forms a similarity matrix F of size
(N + 1)×(M + 1). The alignment is finally found
by backtracking (moving only to adjacent entries
with each step) from entryFN +1,M+1.
8389

--- PAGE 5 ---

Similar to the classification-based approach, the
alignment output can not directly be used in a re-
sponse generation model but has to be converted
to a formatted verification output string. For this,
we use a preformatted template which is shown
in Appendix D. The template groups together the
missing, additional and matching steps to produce
v from the alignment produced by the NW algo-
rithm. The alignment approach can be used with
any utility function and therefore can be adapted to
a variety of domains.
3.2 Response Generation
Direct generation of tutor responses can be chal-
lenging because one model has to reason over the
student solution, pick a teaching strategy, and gen-
erate a response in one step. This has been shown
to produce hallucinations (Macina et al., 2023a).
We tackle this by incorporating an additional veri-
fication step that informs the response generation
model, as previously discussed. Our aim is to split
the task into two less complex tasks which should
reduce errors if each task can be performed well
enough and has been shown to reduce hallucina-
tions in document-grounded dialog (Adolphs et al.,
2022) and question answering (Press et al., 2023).
The verifier and response generation model are
combined in a two-stage approach. First, the veri-
fier outputs a verification v of the student solution
sq based on a reference solution ˆsq. Then, the re-
sponse generation model is conditioned on v, the
dialog historyH, and background knowledge k.
In our work, k consists of the student solution sq,
optionally the reference solution ˆsq, and the math
word problem q. Ifvθ is a distribution over verifi-
cation labels, the overall model is:
p(y, v|H, k) = vθ′(v|sq, ˆsq)  
verification
·pθ(y|H, k, v)  
generation
(2)
The full model provides us with a verification out-
put and the generated response which makes the
internal reasoning of the tutor model in terms of
student errors more explicit and controllable.
4 Data Collection
We propose and evaluate various verifiers in this
work. Since some of them require training data and
to evaluate their performance, we collect a dataset
of 1,002 human-produced verification outputs to
train and evaluate them. This is similar in size to a
related corpus (Jacovi et al., 2024). In this section,
we describe the annotation task and data collection.
Incorrect Student Solutions Source Our work
extends MathDial (Macina et al., 2023a) by hav-
ing teachers annotate incorrect student solutions
from the dataset with their first error step. There,
these incorrect student solutions were used to con-
dition a student model (INSTRUCT GPT ) to gener-
ate responses in a dialogue with a human teacher.
MathDial uses names and genders randomly sam-
pled from a diverse set of cultural and ethnical
backgrounds and reasoning errors sourced from
learning sciences literature during data collection.
Specifically, the problems in MathDial are based
on the GSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021) dataset of multi-
step math word problems. In MathDial, the reason-
ing chains are generated using a 2-shot CoT prompt
with GPT-3.5- TURBO , and temperature sampling
(T = 0.7) is used to get multiple reasoning paths
(n = 50). Finally, the most common incorrect so-
lution is chosen. Subsequently, their student model
is prompted to respond to a human teacher as a stu-
dent who tries to solve a problem with a particular
incorrect solution.
To not skew our dataset to errors, we balance it
with rephrased reference solutions from the student
model. We reproduce the student model prompt
from MathDial to generate student responses using
the reference solutions. All reference solutions and
student responses with incorrect solutions are part
of the dataset. Details are in Appendix A.
Student Solution Annotation The objective of
the annotation is to mark the exact step of the first
error in the student solution. We do not annotate
error steps after the first one to decrease ambiguity,
as they frequently stem from the first error. We
recruit teachers through Prolific1, who first read the
problem and then mark the precise step of the first
error in the student solution. Teachers can access
the reference solution to reduce task complexity.
Details of the task, the user interface, and examples
of collected data are in Appendix A. To compute
agreement, 10% of the samples are annotated by
one additional annotator with an inter-rater relia-
bility of Cohen’sκ= 0.75 indicating substantial
agreement (Cohen, 1960). We show the distribu-
tion of incorrect student solution steps in Figure 3.
1https://www.prolific.com
8390

--- PAGE 6 ---

5 Experiments
We evaluate different verifiers on our dataset and
use them to inform response generation models to
improve their correctness. Since we extend Math-
Dial with additional annotations we use MathDial
dialogues for evaluating tutor response generation.
Besides math problem and student solution in a dia-
log, we either use a model-generated CoT reference
solution if marked by “solution” or no reference
solution as input to the models. Next, we detail
metrics and models.
5.1 Metrics
For teacher response generation, we evaluate the
generated output uT of each model by compar-
ing it to a human-annotated response ˆuT from
MathDial. We report standard text generation met-
rics: the sacrebleu (Post, 2018) implementation
of BLEU (sBLEU) to measure word overlap and
BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) (BF1, using the
all-MiniLM-L6-v2 checkpoint) to measure seman-
tic similarity. Moreover, we report the knowledge
F1 (KF1) score with respect to the grounding infor-
mation (correct solution in the case of MathDial)
which has been used as a proxy for faithfulness in
prior work (Daheim et al., 2024). Similar to (Zheng
et al., 2024; Jurenka et al., 2024), we also prompt
LLAMA3-70B and use it complementary to human
evaluation (the same task and instructions are used
in both) to assess how targeted, correct, and action-
able a response is. Details about the LLM-based
evaluation are found in Appendix E.
5.2 Models
For both verification and response generation,
we use different prompted or finetuned models.
For verification, we compare the closed-source
model GPT-3.5 to the open models LLAMA2 and
LLAMA3. For the latter, we prompt the 70B ver-
sion of the models and finetune LLAMA2-7B us-
ing LoRA. For response generation, we evaluate
prompting GPT-3.5 and finetuning the encoder-
decoder model Flan-T5 with 3B parameters. We
finetune Flan-T5 again using LoRA for both the
direct modeling and verify-then-generate approach.
6 Results
We first show the performance of different verifica-
tion models in Section 6.1 and then use verification
models in response generation in Section 6.2.
Model Overall Verification Stepwise
Corr. F1 Err. F1 F1 micro F1
Few-shot
GPT3.5 0.66 0.52 0.59 0.42
+ solution 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.61
Llama2-70B 0.69 0.38 0.54 0.17
+ solution 0.78 0.59 0.68 0.48
Llama3-70B 0.74 0.58 0.66 0.56
+ solution 0.90 0.87 0.89 0.70
Finetuned
Llama2-7B 0.89 0.67 0.78 0.20
+ solution 0.81 0.80 0.80 0.28
Table 1: Verifying student solutions can be challenging
even for strong LLMs. Models are worse at verifying
erroneous responses (Err. F1) than correct responses
(Corr. F1). Providing a reference solution improves all
models. Finetuning using our data can make models
more robust when no such solution is present and make
small models outperform larger prompted ones.
6.1 Verification
In this section, we benchmark LLMs on their abil-
ity to evaluate the correctness of student solutions
using the Overall Verification and Stepwise Verifi-
cation approaches from Section 3.1. For Stepwise
Verification we use the multi-class classification
approach, because it performed better than itera-
tive classification in our experiments. A compar-
ison is found in Appendix B. We measure the F1
score (balanced dataset), in particular, micro F1 for
Stepwise Verification (imbalanced dataset, see Fig-
ure 3). We find in Table 1 that Overall Verification
can be challenging even for state-of-the-art LLMs.
All prompted models show comparably low perfor-
mance when prompted without a reference solution
and especially struggle with identifying incorrect
responses. Providing a reference solution improves
results significantly. However, for Stepwise Verifi-
cation even the reference solution does not improve
micro F1 beyond 0.70. This result is consistent
with expert educator-based assessment (Yen and
Hsu, 2023) and LLM self-correction results (Huang
et al., 2024; Tyen et al., 2024).
Interestingly, our dataset can be used effectively
for finetuning. Even a smaller LLAMA2-7B model
can outperform larger prompted models on Overall
Verification, especially when no solution is pro-
vided. Potentially, the additional finetuning steps
make it easier for the model to also solve the prob-
lem before verification. The finetuned Stepwise
Verification model outperforms its larger prompted
counterpart LLAMA2-70B when no solution is
8391

--- PAGE 7 ---

Automatic Metrics LLM Judge (%)
Model Variant sBLEU KF1 BF1 Targeted Correct Actionable
- Human 100.0 100.0 100.0 27 82 87
Few-shot
GPT-3.5 Baseline 2.0 27.0 51.2 29 37 27
Error Reason 1.5 22.5 46.7 34 40 56
Error Description 2.8 30.3 52.6 62 66 45
Step Alignment 2.3 29.8 53.3 42 61 26
Finetuned
Flan-T5-3B Baseline 2.6 27.6 56.0 1 89 76
Error Description 3.0 26.7 56.0 2 92 84
Table 2: Adding an additional verification stage to ground tutor response generation models leads to responses that
are more targeted at the student error, less frequently hallucinated, and more actionable for the student, both for
finetuned and prompted models. Proving a textual Error Description of the student solution performs better than
Step Alignment of student and reference solution, as well as providing a shorter Error Reason.
provided. Results for finetuning show a ten-fold
cross-validation. Further details are in Appendix H.
6.2 Response Generation
Next, we show in Table 2 that combining verifi-
cation and tutor response generation models can
improve the quality of the generated responses. We
compare the Error Description and Step Alignment
verifiers to direct response generation and using
the Error Reason (Wang et al., 2024b). There,
the error is categorized into either: guess, misin-
terpret, right-idea, imprecise, not sure, or careless.
We use a subset of MathDial, where the student
describes their solution to the teacher in the dialog,
and generate the following teacher utterance.
First, we prompt GPT-3.5 using the prompt tem-
plates from Section 3.1 for comparability. We find
that providing only the Error Reason does not im-
prove over the direct baseline in simpler automatic
metrics (sBLEU, KF1, BF1) but only in terms of
the LLM-based judging. Using the more detailed
Error Description which provides the exact mistake
of the student gives larger improvements, both in
terms of automatic metrics and LLM-based judging.
Similarly, we find Step Alignment to be helpful,
but to provide less actionable responses. When
finetuning with the Error Description, we obtain
improvements over the finetuned baseline but they
are smaller and do not hold for each metric.
Our qualitative analysis shows that both Step
Alignment and Error Description result in re-
sponses that better localize the exact student er-
ror. For example, the baseline often assesses the
solution wrongly or skips the first error step and in-
stead asks for the solution of a later step. Examples
Model Variant target ↑corr↑act↑
Verification
GPT3.5 Error Description - 70.6 -
Llama3-70B Error Description - 82.4 -
Response Generation
- Human 35.0 45.0 42.5
Few-shot
GPT3.5 Baseline 30.0 37.5 30.0
Error Reason 27.5 22.5 37.5
Error Description57.5 62.5 45.0
Step Alignment 57.5 60.0 27.5
Finetuned
Flan-T5-3B Baseline 7.5 20.0 25.0
Error Description20.0 35.0 35.0
Table 3: Human evaluation with four expert annota-
tors shows that verification before generation improves
along the targetedness, correctness, and actionability
(without telling the solution) of responses. We find
that Error Description works best and improves both
prompted and finetuned models.
are shown in Table 10 and Table 11. Section 6.3
confirms our results by human evaluation.
6.3 Human Evaluation
We conduct a human evaluation using teachers as
expert annotators. All annotators are recruited on
Prolific after manual screening. We assess whether
the generated responses are targeted, correct, and
actionable without outright telling the solution. An-
notators are blind to the model source. The exact
questions are as follows. 1) ( Targeted (T)) Does
the Teacher point out the root cause of the student’s
mistake? 2) ( Correctness (C)) Is the Teacher’s
response factually correct with respect to the ref-
erence solution? 3) ( Actionable (A)) - Does the
Teacher provide actionable steps to let the Student
correct the mistake without giving away the full
8392

--- PAGE 8 ---

answer? More details are in Appendix C.
Responses from 6 models and one human re-
sponse from MathDial were annotated for a ran-
dom set of 40 conversations. To compute inter-rater
reliability, 9 conversations were annotated with at
least 2 raters for each response. Cohen’s kappa is
0.21, 0.25, and 0.13 for targeted, correctness, and
actionable. For Error Description correctness it is
κ= 0.30. Next, we describe the results, first on
verification and then for response generation.
Verification Annotators assess the Error Descrip-
tion as correct if the exact mistake of the student
is found and incorrect when the model says that
the solution is correct when it is not and vice versa,
misses the step of the error, or is generic. Results
in Table 3 show that LLAMA3-70B outperforms
GPT-3.5 but also with 82.4% of the errors being
found correctly.
Response Generation Next, in Table 3, we eval-
uate how targeted, correct, and actionable the re-
sponses generated by different models are. We find
that providing the Error Reason improves over the
baseline only in terms of how actionable responses
are. We hypothesize that conditioning on only the
reason is insufficient for a targeted response. Error
Description and Step Alignment provide more in-
formation regarding the exact error and therefore
improve strongly over the baseline in both target-
edness and correctness. Using Step Alignment
information also does not improve actionability but
Error Description improves it. The same improve-
ments also hold for using the Error Description for
a finetuned model. All in all, we find strong evi-
dence that using our verify-then-generate approach
improves teacher response generation.
7 Ablation Studies
Next, we provide further ablations, first on the
utility function used in the NW algorithm (Sec-
tion 7.1) and then on the impact of verification
before response generation based on its correctness
and problem difficulty (Section 7.2).
7.1 Alignment
We compare different utility functions used for the
NW Step Alignment algorithm in Table 4. For the
comparison, 30 alignments between a student and
reference solution were produced by humans and
the accuracy of student solution step alignment is
measured. As utility functions we use the cosine
Step Alignment t∗ c∗ Accuracy(%)
Random 0.6 -0.2 43.6
Solution Match 0.6 -0.3 51.9
SBERT 0.8 -0.1 58.2
Roscoe 0.9 -0.1 61.4
Table 4: We compare different utility functions for
Step Alignment with the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm
based on 30 human-annotated alignments. Semantic-
similarity-based utility function (SBERT, Roscoe) per-
forms better than random utility or an indicator function
of whether the numerical substep solutions match.
Model Error Desc. T C A
Few-shot
GPT3.5 incorrect 50.0 62.5 50.0
correct 62.5 62.5 41.7
Llama3-70B incorrect 41.7 33.3 25.0
correct 82.1 71.4 21.4
Finetuned
Flan-T5-3B incorrect 08.3 25.0 41.7
correct 25.0 39.3 32.1
Table 5: We find that tutor responses are much more
often correct and targeted if the Error Description is
correct. Data from human evaluation.
similarity of Sentence-BERT (SBERT) (Reimers
and Gurevych, 2019) embeddings and embeddings
from a model trained on Roscoe (Golovneva et al.,
2023), as well as a random utility and an indica-
tor function that is 1 when two substeps have the
same numerical solution and 0 otherwise. Similar-
ity thresholdt and gap utilityc are optimized via a
hyperparameter grid search, as indicated byt∗and
c∗. We find that cosine similarity works best and
training on relevant math data finetuning in Roscoe
further improves performance.
7.2 Verification
Verification correctness is important Table 5
shows how the correctness of the Error Description
verification influences the response generated by
the tutor model. The results are taken from human
evaluation, as described in Section 6.3. Overall, we
find that a correct Error Description leads to more
targeted and correct responses. If the Error Descrip-
tion is wrong, responses tend to be less targeted
and are often incorrect which can be detrimental
to student learning, as students are taught wrong
information. Nevertheless, the responses can also
be less actionable if feedback is correct, potentially
due to the model often telling students the solution
8393

--- PAGE 9 ---

Model Steps T C A Error Desc.
Few-shot
GPT3.5 3 62.5 75.0 37.5 50.0
4 61.1 55.6 55.6 72.2
5 50.0 64.3 50.0 50.0
Llama3-70B 3 87.5 75.0 12.5 87.5
4 72.2 72.2 72.2 72.2
5 57.1 35.7 57.1 50.0
Finetuned
Flan-T5-3B 3 12.5 25.0 25.0 87.5
4 27.8 50.0 50.0 72.2
5 14.3 21.4 14.3 50.0
Table 6: For prompted models, responses for problems
with shorter solution lengths are more often correct and
targeted, because such problems are likely less complex.
For finetuned models we do not find this trend. More
steps can decrease description correctness (Error Desc.).
Data from human evaluation of Error Description.
or facts without scaffolding.
Problem difficulty influences verification Fi-
nally, we show in Table 6 that the performance
of both verification and our verify-then-generate
approach is heavily correlated with the number of
reasoning steps that are used in the reference so-
lution of a given math word problem. We use this
as a proxy for problem difficulty. First of all, the
performance of the LLAMA3 70B Error Descrip-
tion decreases with the number of steps. This is
reflected in the decreased correctness and target-
edness of the responses of the few-shot prompted
LLAMA3 model. For GPT-3.5 we do not find a
similar conclusion for the Error Description model
but at least targetedness still decreases with the
number of steps. For the finetuned model we do not
see similar trends but instead find the best perfor-
mance for problems with four steps, likely because
these are more common in the training data.
8 Discussion
Student errors are key learning opportunities. Tu-
tors should recognize them and precisely guide
students with targeted feedback without telling the
full solution. Our results show that even state-of-
the-art LLMs can struggle with this but that adding
a separate verification step can help. Still, while
verification can make responses more targeted, they
sometimes tend to be less actionable (cf. Table 5,
for example). This suggests that there is an in-
herent trade-off between targeted and actionable
responses that future work could explore further.
Related to this, just prompting models might
not be enough to elicit pedagogy if LLMs are opti-
mized mainly for solving accuracy, as also reported
by Jurenka et al. (2024). Rather, training on high-
quality data, which still is hard to obtain, might
be required. This is also supported by our results
in Table 1, where smaller finetuned models can
even outperform their larger counterparts.
High-quality data is also important for the reli-
able evaluation of dialog tutors. In particular, it
is important to understand different fine-grained
quality criteria, such as correct verification that
the student’s solution is correct or identification
of which step of the student’s solution is incorrect.
Both are important prerequisites to understanding
how effectively dialog tutors can foster learning.
Future work can therefore also build on our dataset
and evaluation protocols to improve the assessment
of dialog tutors.
9 Conclusion
Motivated by effective teaching practice, we split
the task of tutor response generation into two sepa-
rate steps of verifying the student solution and gen-
erating a response. To evaluate our approach, we
collect a dataset of around 1k teacher-annotated so-
lutions to augment an existing math tutoring corpus.
Our results show that splitting response generation
into two steps can result in more targeted and cor-
rect responses that better scaffold human learning.
We showcase this using both automatic evaluation
and human evaluation annotated by teachers, both
for prompted and finetuned models.
10 Limitations
Focus on scaffolding problem-solving The tu-
toring scenarios which are considered are centered
around the student problem-solving stage. In this
case, students have prior knowledge. mostly under-
stand the learning topics and practice them. How-
ever, different learning scenarios such as direct
instruction, building rapport with students, or open-
ended discussions are not considered in this work.
Evaluating student solutions and responding ap-
propriately to a student’s mistakes is inherently
challenging, even for human teachers. Furthermore,
teachers should ideally give adaptive feedback de-
pending on the problem-solving strategy chosen
by the student and treat different errors in different
ways to uncover any misconceptions (Nye et al.,
2014; Ross and Andreas, 2024). For example, in
math, productive errors present important learning
8394

--- PAGE 10 ---

opportunities for students to learn from them (Ka-
pur, 2016; Shaughnessy et al., 2021; Sinha and Ka-
pur, 2021), e.g. by teacher-guided self-correction
or targeted instruction, while unproductive errors,
such as numerical miscalculations, could be easily
resolved using a calculator (Lepper and Woolver-
ton, 2002).
Difficulty of obtaining student reasoning chains
Model-generated reasoning chains might contain
the same biases as human students (Opedal et al.,
2024). On the other hand, there might be many ad-
ditional differences from human student reasoning,
e.g. students might not always stick to exact math
notations or skip some steps in the explanations.
However, because such data from students is sen-
sitive, we work with model-generated reasoning
solutions and responses.
Focus on multi-step problems Procedural or
multi-step problems are the basis of most of
the scientific disciplines, therefore we believe
our approach should be general enough to work
across any science subject, especially by includ-
ing retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) from
textbooks. However, it is still an open research
question whether a similar solution would work for
language learning or fact-based problems, and how
models perform in languages other than English.
Evaluation is teacher-centered and comple-
mented with an LLM-judge Future work
should focus on student user studies with AI tu-
tors. However, this requires careful experimental
consideration and safety mechanisms. Moreover,
assessment of the responses is done exclusively by
teachers and therefore future work should consider
running assessments of the responses by students.
Potential biases in data collection Our work
bases on MathDial (Macina et al., 2023a). While
MathDial aims to capture a variety of student per-
sonas and reasoning errors by prompting the LLM
with names and genders sampled from various eth-
nic backgrounds and reasoning errors based on
categories from learning sciences literature, our
data may still exhibit biases. In particular, the di-
verse backgrounds in MathDial are promoted by
prompting LLMs with names from culturally and
ethnically diverse set. This, however, bears the
risk of exacerbating biases in LLMs towards such
groups and could also fail due to the LLM not
capturing the personas’ cultural aspects well. Fur-
thermore, the majority of annotators in MathDial
stem from western countries which could further
bias the data.
11 Acknowledgements
This research work has been funded by a Swiss
National Science Foundation award (#201009), a
Responsible AI grant by the Haslerstiftung, by the
German Federal Ministry of Education and Re-
search and the Hessian Ministry of Higher Educa-
tion, Research, Science and the Arts within their
joint support of the National Research Center for
Applied Cybersecurity ATHENE. Nico Daheim ac-
knowledges travel support from ELISE (GA no
951847). Jakub Macina acknowledges funding
from the ETH AI Center Doctoral Fellowship,
Asuera Stiftung, and the ETH Zurich Foundation.
We thank Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Kumar Shrid-
har, Shehzaad Dhuliawala, and Justus-Jonas Erker
for valuable feedback and discussions.
12 Ethics Statement
Intended usage The benefits of our dataset are
in understanding and designing AI technology to
assist teachers and students during the problem-
solving stage. Most importantly, the goal of such
systems is to not replace human teachers, but rather
enhance their capabilities and make them focus on
important and human aspects of teaching. We re-
lease the dataset under CC-BY-4.0 license 2 for fur-
ther usage and exploration by the community. This
also adheres to the licensing of MathDial, which
we extend.
Data Anonymization and Privacy As the data
in education are strictly confidential we obtained
approval on the proposal 3 of the collection inter-
face, questions and how long the data will be stored.
All participants fill informed consent at the begin-
ning of the annotation and may withdraw without
reason at any time. We store only the necessary
data and do not store any personally identifiable
information. The collected data are stored anony-
mously and securely. Moreover, no student data
are used in this work.
Accessibility and Potential Misuse Our work
focus on addressing hallucinations of LLM Tu-
tors and their generation of factually incorrect re-
2https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
deed.en
3The study was approved by the ETH Zurich Ethics Com-
mittee (IRB) under EK-2024-N-97.
8395

--- PAGE 11 ---

sponses. This directly addresses one of the impor-
tant aspects of responsible use of AI which does not
spread incorrect information, especially in educa-
tion. We encourage the community to work on this
important topic by open-sourcing the dataset, the
code for running the benchmarks, and the methods
used in this work. These are primarily intended for
research purposes. As with any AI technology, the
methods and dataset could be misused. However,
we believe by open-sourcing the work we inform
about the risks and capabilities of the technology
a wider research community which then leads to
further improvements.
References
Leonard Adolphs, Kurt Shuster, Jack Urbanek, Arthur
Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2022. Reason first, then
respond: Modular generation for knowledge-infused
dialogue. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pages 7112–
7132, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Vincent Aleven, Bruce M McLaren, Jonathan Sewall,
Martin Van Velsen, Octav Popescu, Sandra Demi,
Michael Ringenberg, and Kenneth R Koedinger.
2016. Example-tracing tutors: Intelligent tutor devel-
opment for non-programmers. International Journal
of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 26:224–269.
John R Anderson, C Franklin Boyle, and Brian J
Reiser. 1985. Intelligent tutoring systems. Science,
228(4698):456–462.
Julia Anghileri. 2006. Scaffolding practices that en-
hance mathematics learning. Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 9:33–52.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ
Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S.
Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma
Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson, S. Buch, Dallas Card,
Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri S. Chatterji, Annie S.
Chen, Kathleen A. Creel, Jared Davis, Dora Dem-
szky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Dur-
mus, Stefano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Etha-
yarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lau-
ren E. Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah D. Goodman,
Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto,
Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny
Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas F. Icard, Saahil
Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth
Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, O. Khat-
tab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark S. Krass, Ranjay Krishna,
Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal Ladhak,
Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent,
Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu Ma, Ali Ma-
lik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir P. Mirchandani,
Eric Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa, Suraj Nair, Avanika
Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Benjamin Newman,
Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles, Hamed Nilforoshan,
J. F. Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadim-
itriou, Joon Sung Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance,
Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Robert Re-
ich, Hongyu Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf H. Roohani,
Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher R’e, Dorsa
Sadigh, Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy
Shih, Krishna Parasuram Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin,
Rohan Taori, Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr,
Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun
Wu, Yuhuai Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Ya-
sunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei A. Zaharia, Michael
Zhang, Tianyi Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang,
Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. 2021.
On the opportunities and risks of foundation models.
ArXiv.
Andrew Caines, Helen Yannakoudakis, Helen Allen,
Pascual Pérez-Paredes, Bill Byrne, and Paula Buttery.
2022. The teacher-student chatroom corpus version
2: more lessons, new annotation, automatic detection
of sequence shifts. In Swedish Language Technology
Conference and NLP4CALL, pages 23–35.
Andrew Caines, Helen Yannakoudakis, Helena Edmond-
son, Helen Allen, Pascual Pérez-Paredes, Bill Byrne,
and Paula Buttery. 2020. The teacher-student chat-
room corpus. In Proceedings of the 9th Workshop
on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning,
pages 10–20.
Alexis Chevalier, Jiayi Geng, Alexander Wettig,
Howard Chen, Sebastian Mizera, Toni Annala, Max
Aragon, Arturo Rodriguez Fanlo, Simon Frieder, Si-
mon Machado, Akshara Prabhakar, Ellie Thieu, Ji-
achen T. Wang, Zirui Wang, Xindi Wu, Mengzhou
Xia, Wenhan Xia, Jiatong Yu, Junjie Zhu, Zhiyong
Ren, Sanjeev Arora, and Danqi Chen. 2024. Lan-
guage models as science tutors. In Forty-first Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, et al. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math
word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168.
Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for
nominal scales. Educational and psychological mea-
surement, 20(1):37–46.
Nico Daheim, Nouha Dziri, Mrinmaya Sachan, Iryna
Gurevych, and Edoardo Ponti. 2024. Elastic weight
removal for faithful and abstractive dialogue gener-
ation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7096–7112,
Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Olga Golovneva, Moya Peng Chen, Spencer Poff, Mar-
tin Corredor, Luke Zettlemoyer, Maryam Fazel-
Zarandi, and Asli Celikyilmaz. 2023. ROSCOE: A
suite of metrics for scoring step-by-step reasoning. In
8396

--- PAGE 12 ---

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul
Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and
Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring mathematical
problem solving with the MATH dataset. In Thirty-
fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2).
Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra,
Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xiny-
ing Song, and Denny Zhou. 2024. Large language
models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. In The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Alon Jacovi, Yonatan Bitton, Bernd Bohnet, Jonathan
Herzig, Or Honovich, Michael Tseng, Michael
Collins, Roee Aharoni, and Mor Geva. 2024. A
chain-of-thought is as strong as its weakest link: A
benchmark for verifiers of reasoning chains. In Pro-
ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 4615–4634, Bangkok, Thailand. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Irina Jurenka, Markus Kunesch, Kevin R McKee,
Daniel Gillick, Shaojian Zhu, Sara Wiltberger, Shub-
ham Milind Phal, Katherine Hermann, Daniel Kasen-
berg, Avishkar Bhoopchand, et al. 2024. Towards
responsible development of generative ai for educa-
tion: An evaluation-driven approach. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.12687.
Manu Kapur. 2016. Examining productive failure, pro-
ductive success, unproductive failure, and unproduc-
tive success in learning. Educational Psychologist,
51(2):289–299.
Soonwoo Kwon, Sojung Kim, Minju Park, Seunghyun
Lee, and Kyuseok Kim. 2024. BIPED: Pedagogi-
cally informed tutoring system for ESL education.
In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 3389–3414, Bangkok, Thailand.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mark R. Lepper and Maria Woolverton. 2002. Chapter
7 - the wisdom of practice: Lessons learned from
the study of highly effective tutors. In Joshua Aron-
son, editor,Improving Academic Achievement, Educa-
tional Psychology, pages 135–158. Academic Press,
San Diego.
Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Sankalan Chowdhury, Tan-
may Sinha, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrin-
maya Sachan. 2023a. MathDial: A dialogue tutoring
dataset with rich pedagogical properties grounded
in math reasoning problems. In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2023, pages 5602–5621, Singapore. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Lingzhi Wang, Tanmay
Sinha, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya
Sachan. 2023b. Opportunities and challenges in neu-
ral dialog tutoring. In Proceedings of the 17th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , pages 2357–2372,
Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler
Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang,
Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder,
Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdan-
bakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-refine: Itera-
tive refinement with self-feedback. In Thirty-seventh
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems.
Saul B Needleman and Christian D Wunsch. 1970. A
general method applicable to the search for simi-
larities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins.
Journal of molecular biology, 48(3):443–453.
Benjamin D Nye, Arthur C Graesser, and Xiangen Hu.
2014. Autotutor and family: A review of 17 years of
natural language tutoring. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 24:427–469.
Andreas Opedal, Alessandro Stolfo, Haruki Shirakami,
Ying Jiao, Ryan Cotterell, Bernhard Schölkopf, Ab-
ulhair Saparov, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2024. Do
language models exhibit the same cognitive biases
in problem solving as human learners? In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning.
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, and Mrinmaya
Sachan. 2024. Autotutor meets large language mod-
els: A language model tutor with rich pedagogy and
guardrails. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Con-
ference on Learning@ Scale, pages 5–15.
Giovanni Paolini, Ben Athiwaratkun, Jason Krone,
Jie Ma, Alessandro Achille, Rishita Anubhai, Ci-
cero Nogueira dos Santos, Bing Xiang, and Stefano
Soatto. 2021. Structured prediction as translation be-
tween augmented natural languages. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Matt Post. 2018. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU
scores. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on
Machine Translation: Research Papers, pages 186–
191, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt,
Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Measuring and
narrowing the compositionality gap in language mod-
els. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 5687–5711, Singa-
pore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert:
Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
8397

--- PAGE 13 ---

Brian J. Reiser. 2004. Scaffolding complex learning:
The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing
student work. Journal of the Learning Sciences ,
13(3):273–304.
Alexis Ross and Jacob Andreas. 2024. Toward in-
context teaching: Adapting examples to students’
misconceptions. In Proceedings of the 62nd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 13283–
13310, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Swarnadeep Saha, Peter Hase, and Mohit Bansal. 2023.
Can language models teach? teacher explanations
improve student performance via personalization. In
Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Meghan Shaughnessy, Rosalie DeFino, Erin Pfaff, and
Merrie Blunk. 2021. I think i made a mistake: How
do prospective teachers elicit the thinking of a student
who has made a mistake? Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 24:335–359.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath,
Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2024. Re-
flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 36.
Kumar Shridhar, Jakub Macina, Mennatallah El-Assady,
Tanmay Sinha, Manu Kapur, and Mrinmaya Sachan.
2022. Automatic generation of socratic subquestions
for teaching math word problems. In Proceedings of
the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 4136–4149, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Tanmay Sinha and Manu Kapur. 2021. When problem
solving followed by instruction works: Evidence for
productive failure. Review of Educational Research,
91(5):761–798.
Shashank Sonkar, Naiming Liu, Debshila Mallick, and
Richard Baraniuk. 2023. Class: A design frame-
work for building intelligent tutoring systems based
on learning science principles. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2023, pages 1941–1961.
Katherine Stasaski, Kimberly Kao, and Marti A. Hearst.
2020. CIMA: A large open access dialogue dataset
for tutoring. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Work-
shop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educa-
tional Applications, pages 52–64, Seattle, W A, USA
→ Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam
Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze Cheng,
Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al.
2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog applica-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239.
Gladys Tyen, Hassan Mansoor, Victor Carbune, Peter
Chen, and Tony Mak. 2024. LLMs cannot find rea-
soning errors, but can correct them given the error
location. In Findings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics ACL 2024, pages 13894–13908,
Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Junling Wang, Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Sankalan
Pal Chowdhury, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2024a.
Book2Dial: Generating teacher student interactions
from textbooks for cost-effective development of ed-
ucational chatbots. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pages 9707–
9731, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Rose E. Wang, Qingyang Zhang, Carly Robinson, Su-
sanna Loeb, and Dorottya Demszky. 2024b. Bridging
the novice-expert gap via models of decision-making:
A case study on remediating math mistakes. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language processing.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Sebastian Wollny, Jan Schneider, Daniele Di Mitri,
Joshua Weidlich, Marc Rittberger, and Hendrik
Drachsler. 2021. Are we there yet?-a systematic
literature review on chatbots in education. Frontiers
in artificial intelligence, 4.
An-Zi Yen and Wei-Ling Hsu. 2023. Three questions
concerning the use of large language models to fa-
cilitate mathematics learning. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2023, pages 3055–3069, Singapore. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q.
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. Bertscore: Eval-
uating text generation with bert. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. 2024.
Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot
arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36.
8398

--- PAGE 14 ---

Figure 2: User interface for annotating the step of the
first error, their categorization, and description of the
error.
A Data Collection Details
The annotators are screened through Prolific to be
teachers native in English with an overall accep-
tance rate of more than 98% and with at least 500
submissions. We paid a minimum of $20 per hour.
Annotators are from the US, Canada, and the UK,
with a balanced gender ratio, and their age range
is from 25 to 53 years. All annotators have K12
experience and on average they have 12 years of
experience in teaching.
The annotators are first trained for the task with
an interactive practice problem and then annotate
student solutions. In one session one annotator per-
forms 5 stepwise error verifications where they first
pick the exact step with the error and then classify
the error into 8 categories, with separate descrip-
tions of the error for each category. We filter out
all error descriptions not following the prescribed
format to remove low-quality annotations.
The interface is shown in Figure 2. The cate-
gories are: missing or incorrect factual knowledge,
misunderstanding of the question, the reference
solution reached but proceed further, missing quan-
tity, extra quantity, unit conversion error, numerical
calculation, other.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Step
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400Frequency
Mean Error Step: 2.77
Mean Total Steps: 5.92
Step with Error Total Student Solution Steps
Figure 3: Dataset Distribution. The index of the step
with the first error annotated by teachers and the total
student solution steps.
A.1 Dataset Details
The collected dataset is in English and from the
domain of K12 math word problem-solving. Ex-
amples from the dataset are shown in Table 7.
The dataset consists of 1002 data points with 612
unique math problems. The distribution of total
student steps and the location of the first incorrect
steps are shown in Figure 3. Notice the student
solutions contain up to 11 steps with a mean of ca.
6 steps. The location of the first error ranges from
1 to 8 steps with majority of the errors between the
first and third steps.
The incorrect student solutions and reference so-
lutions are part of the MathDial dataset (Macina
et al., 2023a). The prompt used to generate cor-
rect student responses to balance the dataset with
correct student responses are based on the Student
model from (Macina et al., 2023a).
B Details of Overall Verification and
Stepwise Verification
For Stepwise Verification, we compare multi-class
classification and iterative approach on our dataset
and the results are in Table 8. The iterative ap-
proach classifies each step sn whether it is correct
and therefore is more resource-intensive than multi-
class classification. The multi-class classification
directly predicts the label{0,...,N}where 0 rep-
resents the solution is correct. The results indicate
no improvements (with the exception of Llama2-
70B) by using the iterative approach and in the
main paper we therefore report multi-class classifi-
cation results.
Moreover, to confirm the quality of our collected
dataset, we run the same models on the smaller and
8399

--- PAGE 15 ---

Problem: Carl has been selling watermelons on the side of the road for $3 each. This evening he
went home with $105 in profit and 18 watermelons. How many watermelons did he start out with this
morning?
Reference solution: Carl sells his watermelons for $3 each so today he sold $105 / $3 per watermelon
= 35 watermelons. He had 18 watermelons left over, so this morning he started with 18 + 35 = 53
watermelons.
Incorrect solution: Let’s start by finding out how much money Carl made selling the 18 watermelons.
Since he sold each watermelon for $3, he made 18 x $3 = $54. We know that his total profit for the day
was $105, so he must have started with $105 - $54 = $51 worth of watermelons. Since each watermelon
costs $3, he must have started with 51 / $3 = 17 watermelons.
Student response: I started by finding out how much money Carl made selling the 18 watermelons.
Since he sold each watermelon for $3, he made 18 x $3 = $54. Then I realized that his total profit for
the day was $105, so he must have started with $105 - $54 = $51 worth of watermelons. Since each
watermelon costs $3, I concluded that he must have started with 51 / $3 = 17 watermelons.
Error category: Misunderstanding of a question
Error description: Carl did not sell 18 watermelons, but 18 watermelons are left unsold.
Problem: Dakota gets hit by a bus and has to spend 3 days in the hospital. The hospital charges her
$900/day for her bed, $250/hour for two specialists to look at her 15 minutes each, and $1800 for the
ambulance ride. How much is Dakota’s medical bill?
Reference solution: First find the total cost of the hospital bed by multiplying the cost per day by
the number of days: $900/day * 3 days = $2700. Then figure out how many minutes total the two
specialists looked at Dakota: 15 minutes/specialist * 2 specialists = 30 minutes Then divide the number
of minutes by the number of minutes per hour and multiply it by the specialists’ hourly rate to find
their total charge: 30 minutes / 60 minutes/hour * $250/hour = $125. Finally, add up the cost of the
specialists, ambulance and bed to find Dakota’s total bill: $2700 + $1800 + $125 = $4625
Incorrect solution: The hospital charges Dakota $900 x 3 = $2700 for her bed. Each specialist charged
her $250/hour x 2 = $500 for their 15 minutes each. So, Dakota was charged $500 x 2 = $1000 for the
two specialists. Therefore, her medical bill is $2700 + $1000 + $1800 = $5500
Student response: I started by calculating the cost of the bed, which was $900 x 3 days = $2700. Then
I calculated the cost of the two specialists, which was $250/hour x 2 specialists x 15 minutes each =
$500. Then I added all the costs together to get the total cost of $2700 + $1000 + $1800 = $5500
Error category: Misunderstanding of a question
Error description: Student computes charges for a full hour of 2 specialists, not just 15 minutes as
indicated in the question.
Table 7: Examples from the collected dataset. The annotated error lines are in red.
8400

--- PAGE 16 ---

Model micro F1
GPT3.5 multi-class 0.42
+ solution 0.61
GPT3.5 iterative 0.39
+ solution 0.36
Llama2-70B multi-class 0.17
+ solution 0.48
Llama2-70B iterative 0.36
+ solution 0.58
Llama3-70B multi-class 0.56
+ solution 0.70
Llama3-70B iterative 0.56
+ solution 0.58
Table 8: Results of two approaches for Stepwise verifica-
tion and their micro F1 score. Multi-class classification
directly predicts incorrect step N. On the other hand,
the iterative approach iterates over each step and runs a
binary prediction of whether the step is correct until the
first incorrect step is found.
Model Overall Verification Stepwise
Corr. F1 Err. F1 F1 micro F1
Few-shot
GPT3.5 0.75 0.65 0.70 0.50
+ solution 0.91 0.88 0.89 0.63
Llama2-70B 0.07 0.62 0.34 0.11
+ solution 0.80 0.82 0.81 0.59
Table 9: Stepwise verification results on the
small existing dataset from human evaluation of
Roscoe (Golovneva et al., 2023). The Stepwise veri-
fication contains multi-class classification results. The
results of the models are consistent with our dataset.
simpler Roscoe human evaluation set (Golovneva
et al., 2023). The dataset is smaller and contains
105 correct and 95 incorrect solutions. The results
are shown in Table 9 and the conclusions are iden-
tical to our dataset.
C Guidelines for Human Evaluation
The user interface used in the human evaluation is
shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5. All the annotators
had to complete a training for the task where each
of their responses was evaluated and the feedback
was provided to them. We used the subset of the an-
notators from Appendix A with the same selection
conditions and the same payment. Before evaluat-
ing the quality of responses, annotators are asked
to analyze the math problem and the conversation
and explain the student error in an open-ended text.
To not bias their understanding of the student solu-
Figure 4: User interface for explaining the error of the
student and evaluation of two error descriptions from
models. Afterwards, annotators evaluate the quality of
the model responses.
Figure 5: User interface for evaluation of the quality of
the model responses. Some responses contain attention
checks (second question in this case).
8401

--- PAGE 17 ---

tion only subsequently the error descriptions from
verifiers were annotated with their correctness us-
ing these instructions: Does the text above
correctly describe the root cause of the
first student’s mistake? Answer "No" if
the correct part of the student solution
is identified as incorrect. Answer "No"
if is too general without any further
details e.g. ’There is a small mistake’.
The exact wording of the annotation questions
for evaluating the quality of responses is the fol-
lowing:
Targeted Does the Teacher point out to
the root cause of the student’s mistake?
Answer ’No’ if the Teacher gives the right
answer without pointing out the mistake.
Answer ’No’ if the Student’s statement
is wrong and the Teacher does not point
out the mistake directly. Answer ’Yes’
if the Teacher correctly describes the
mistake in the student’s solution. Answer
’No’ if the Teacher addresses the correct
part of the student solution. Answer ’No’
if response is too general and could be
applied to any mistake e.g. ’You made a
small mistake’.
Correctness Is the Teacher’s response
factually correct with respect to the
reference solution? The teacher should
NOT say incorrect information or provide
parts of the solution that are NOT correct
with respect to the reference solution.
Answer ’No’ if the Teacher provides parts
of a solution that is incorrect or does
not guide a student towards the reference
solution. Carefully compare the reference
solution and the Teacher’s response.
Actionable Does the Teacher provide
actionable steps to let the Student
correct the mistake without giving away
the full answer? The teacher should
provide actionable hints or steps WITHOUT
revealing the full reference solution.
Instead, the Tutor should give hints or
ask questions to help the Student find
the solution by themselves. Answer ’No’
if the Teacher simply just reveals the
full reference solution.
D Alignment Details
To find the best hyperparameters for the
Alignment algorithm we run a grid search
using values of similarity threshold t =
[0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95] and gap utilitys c =
[−0.1,−0.2,−0.3,−0.5,−0.7,−1.0,−1.2]. The
best hyperparameters are reported in Table 4.
The exact models which are used for semantic
similarity are SBERT (sentence-transformers/all-
mpnet-base-v2) and Roscoe (facebook/roscoe-512-
roberta-base).
We use the template to transform the output of
the algorithm into the textual prompt. In the tem-
plate, all the steps from the student solution and
reference solution are used. Furthermore, the util-
ity of the alignment can be used to filter out student
solutions that differ completely from reference solu-
tion which we leave for future work. The template
is the following:
Missing steps in student solution:
{missing steps}
Unnecessary steps in the student solution:
{unnecessary steps}
Matching steps: {matching steps}
E Details on LLM-based Evaluation
A response is targeted if it targets the students’
mistake, correct if it does not conflict with ground-
ing information, and actionable if it provides the
student with useful guidance to help the student
progress in their solution attempt. In all cases, for
each quality dimension, we provide the model with
three examples (3-shots). We use the LLAMA3-
70B4 with temperatureT = 0 for reproducibility.
The task description and the examples are the same
as in the human evaluation for instructing the an-
notators described in Section 6.3. The prompt also
includes the reference solution for more reliable
judging (Zheng et al., 2024; Jurenka et al., 2024).
F Qualitative examples
In this section, we show qualitative examples to
better understand the behavior of verification and
verification-based response generation. We first
show examples for prompted models in Table 10
and then show examples for finetuned models in Ta-
ble 11.
4meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct
8402

--- PAGE 18 ---

G Prompts
This section provides the exact prompts used
in our work. First, we show the prompt
used for the baseline, error description-based,
and alignment-based response generation models
in Fig. 6 and Fig. 9. Verification prompts for Er-
ror Description are in Fig. 8 and for Error Rea-
son in Fig. 7. Classification-based verifications
prompts are in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. The prompt
with 5 examples for the CoT solution generation
is in Fig. 12. Then, we show the prompts used
for targeted LLM-based evaluation in Fig. 13, cor-
rectness evaluation in Fig. 14, and evaluation of
how actionable responses are in Fig. 15. To sam-
ple responses from models by prompting we use
temperatureT = 0 for reproducibility.
H Finetuning Details
We finetune all models by extending the hugging-
face transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020) and
using the checkpoints from the huggingface hub in
accordance with the corresponding license agree-
ments.
For verification, we finetune LLAMA2 with 7B
parameters and using LoRA. We use a learning
rate of 1·10−5, linear learning rate decay with
32 warmup steps, a batch size of 2 and train for 6
epochs in total.
For response generation, we finetune Flan-T5
3B with LoRA with a learning rate of 1·10−5, a
batch size of 2 and a total of 10 training epochs.
For both tasks, we used NVIDIA A100 80GB
GPU and training takes around 3-6 hours for 5 or
10-fold cross-validation.
8403

--- PAGE 19 ---

Problem: At a cafe, the breakfast plate has two eggs and twice as many bacon strips as eggs. If 14
customers order breakfast plates, how many bacon strips does the cook need to fry?
Correct Solution: Each breakfast plate has 2 x 2 = 4 bacon strips. The cook needs to fry 14 x 4 = 56
bacon strips.
Error Description Verification: The student incorrectly wrote the number of bacon strips per plate as
2 + 2x, where x is the number of eggs, instead of simply 2 x 2 = 4 bacon strips per plate. This led to an
incorrect total of 84 bacon strips.
Dialogue
Teacher: Hi Claire could you please walk me through your solution
Student: Sure! For each breakfast plate, there are 2 eggs and twice as many bacon strips as eggs. So,
for each breakfast plate, there are 2 + 2x bacon strips, where x is the number of eggs. Since each
breakfast plate has two eggs, x = 2. So, for each breakfast plate, there are 2 + 2x bacon strips = 2 + 2(2)
= 6 bacon strips. Thus, for 14 breakfast plates, the cook needs to fry 6 x 14 = 84 bacon strips.
Generated Responses
Human Teacher: Let’s work on simpler problem. If I have 2 dogs for every cat and I have 5 cats, I
should have double the number of dogs. How many dogs will I have
Baseline: It looks like you made a small mistake in your solution. You correctly found the number of
bacon strips for one breakfast plate, but you used the wrong value for x. Since each breakfast plate has
2 eggs, x should be 2, not 2 eggs. So the correct number of bacon strips for one breakfast plate is 2 +
2(2) = 6, and for 14 plates, the cook needs to fry 6 x 14 = 84 bacon strips. Great effort!
Error reason: It looks like you made a small mistake in your calculation. You correctly found that for
each breakfast plate, there are 6 bacon strips, but when you multiplied by 14, you should have gotten
84, not 6 x 14 = 84. So the correct answer is 6 bacon strips per plate multiplied by 14 plates equals 84
bacon strips.
Error description: It looks like there was a mistake in your calculation for the number of bacon strips
for each breakfast plate. Remember that the breakfast plate has twice as many bacon strips as eggs, so
for each plate, there are 2 eggs and 4 bacon strips. Can you try recalculating the total number of bacon
strips needed for 14 breakfast plates?
Alignment: It looks like you made a small mistake in your solution. The breakfast plate has 2 eggs, so
it has 2 x 2 = 4 bacon strips. If 14 customers order breakfast plates, the cook needs to fry 14 x 4 = 56
bacon strips. The answer is 56.
Table 10: Examples of responses generated by GPT-3.5 prompted models for the same problem.
8404

--- PAGE 20 ---

Problem: A pet store owner had 12 birds, 9 puppies, 5 cats, and 15 spiders. Half the birds were sold
and 3 puppies were adopted. Then, someone left the spider enclosure open and 7 of them went loose.
How many animals does the pet store owner have left?
Correct Solution: There are 12/2 = 6 birds left. There are 9-3= 6 puppies left. There are 15 - 7 = 8
spiders left. The pet store owner has 5+6 + 6 + 8 = 25 animals left.
Verification: The student failed to include the 5 cats in their final count, resulting in an incorrect total
of 20 animals instead of 25.
Dialogue
Teacher: Hi , could you please walk me through your solution?
Student: Sure, I started by taking half of the 12 birds, which is 6 birds. Then, I subtracted 6 from 12 to
get the number of birds left, which is 6. After that, I subtracted 3 from 9 to get the number of puppies
left, which is 6. Finally, I subtracted 7 from 15 to get the number of spiders left, which is 8. So, the pet
store owner has 6 birds, 6 puppies, and 8 spiders left, which adds up to 20 animals.
Generated Responses
Human Teacher: i think you missed something. Cats?
Baseline: How many birds were sold and how many puppies were adopted?
Ours: How many cats did the pet store owner have?
Problem: Every year, Tabitha adds a new color to her hair. She started this tradition when she was
15 years old, which was the year she added her second hair color. In three years, Tabitha will have 8
different colors in the hair. Currently, how old is Tabitha?
Correct solution: Since, three years from now, Tabitha will have 8 different colors in her hair, this
year she has 8 - 3 = 5 colors in her hair. Since she had 2 colors in her hair at the age of 15, she has
added 5-2=3 colors since she was 15 years old. Since she ads one color per year, 3 added colors = 3
added years. Thus, currently, she is 15+3=18 years old.
Verification: The student incorrectly assumed that Tabitha is currently 21 years old, without consider-
ing the information that in three years, she will have 8 different colors in her hair. The student failed to
work backwards to find Tabitha’s current age.
Dialogue
Teacher: Hi Jordy. Tell me about your answer
Student: I think my answer is correct. I used a calculator and I didn’t make any calculation errors. I
figured that since Tabitha started adding a new color to her hair when she was 15, and she has added a
new color every year since then, she must be 21 years old now.
Generated Response
Human: Let’s approach this working backward. If in three years, Tabitha will have 8 colors in her hair,
how many colors does she have in her hair now?
Baseline: How many years has Tabitha been adding a new color to her hair?
Ours: How many different colors does Tabitha have in her hair now?
Table 11: Qualitative examples of finetuned response generation models.
8405

--- PAGE 21 ---

You are an experienced teacher and you are going to respond to a student. The problem your student is solving is on
topic: {topic}.
Problem: {problem}
{conversation}
Teacher (maximum two sentences):
Figure 6: Response generation prompt for the direct baseline. {problem} is a placeholder for the problem the
student is solving, {topic} is the learning topic, and {conversation} is a conversation history.
You are an experienced teacher. Your task is to read a conversation snippet of a tutoring session between a student and
tutor, and determine what type of error the student makes in the conversation. We have a list of common errors that
students make in math, which you can pick from. We also give you the option to write in your own error type if none of
the options apply.
Error list:
0. Student does not seem to understand or guessed the answer.
1. Student misinterpreted the question.
2. Student made a careless mistake.
3. Student has the right idea, but is not quite there.
4. Student’s answer is not precise enough or the tutor is being too picky about the form of the student’s answer.
5. None of the above, but I have a different description (please specify in your reasoning).
6. Not sure, but I’m going to try to diagnose the student.
Here is the conversation snippet:
Lesson topic: {topic}.
Problem: {problem}
{conversation}
Why do you think the student made this mistake? Pick an option number from the error list and provide the reason
behind your choice. Format your answer as: {"answer": , "reason": "write out your reason for picking here"}
Figure 7: Verification for Error reason baseline (Wang et al., 2024b). {topic} is the learning topic, {problem} is
a placeholder for the problem the student is solving, and {conversation} is a conversation history.
You are an experienced math teacher. Your goal is to identify the correctness of the Student’s Solution to a Problem.
Problem: {problem}
Expected reference solution: {solution}
{conversation}
Q: Find the first error in the student solution compared to the expected reference solution and write a one line description.
If no error, write "Student’ solution is Correct".
A:
Figure 8: Verification prompt for Error description of the first student error. {problem} is a placeholder for
the problem the student is solving, {solution} is a solution generated from the same model using CoT prompt
in Figure 12, and {conversation} is a conversation history.
You are an experienced teacher and you are going to respond to a student. The problem your student is solving is on
topic: {topic}.
Problem: {problem}
Assessment of student solution: {description}
{conversation}
Teacher (maximum two sentences):
Figure 9: Response generation for Error reason baseline, Error description, and Alignment generation. {problem}
is a placeholder for the problem the student is solving, {topic} is the learning topic, {conversation} is a
conversation history, {description} is the result of the particular verification step.
8406

--- PAGE 22 ---

You are an experienced math teacher. Your goal is to identify the correctness of the Student’s Solution to a Problem.
Problem: Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half as many clips in May. How
many clips did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
Student Solution: I started by calculating clips in May which is 48/2 = 24. Then I sum this up, so she sold 48+24 = 72
clips in April and May together.
Q: Is the Student Solution incorrect? Write "Yes" if it is incorrect, or "No" if it is correct.
A: No
Problem: Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half as many clips in May. How
many clips did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
Student Solution: Sure. We know Natalia sold 48 clips in April. She sold 48*2 = 96 clips in May. To compute for two
months, I simply sum it up, so 48+96 = 144 clips in April and May together.
Is the Student Solution incorrect? Write "Yes" if it is incorrect, or "No" if it is correct.
A: Yes
Problem: {question}
Student Solution: {student answer}
Is the Student Solution incorrect? Write "Yes" if it is incorrect, or "No" if it is correct.
A:
Figure 10: Prompt for Overall Verification. In +solution settings, the reference solution is inserted before the Student
Solution. {question} is a placeholder for the problem text and {student answer} for the student response.
You are an experienced math teacher. Your goal is to identify the step of the first mistake in the Student’s Solution to a
Problem.
Problem: Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half as many clips in May. How many clips
did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
Student Solution: Step 1 - She sold 48/2 = 24 clips in May. Step 2 - Natalia sold 48+24 = 72 clips in April and May
together.
Q: Is the Student Solution incorrect? Write only the step number with the first error or 0 if no error is found.
A: 0
Problem: Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half as many clips in May. How
many clips did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
Student Solution: Step 1 - Natalia sold 48 clips in April. Step 2 - She sold 48*2 = 96 clips in May. Step 3 - She sold
48+96 = 144 clips in April and May together.
Q: Is the Student Solution incorrect? Write only the step number with the first error or 0 if no error is found.
A: 2
Problem: {question}
Student Solution: {student answer}
Q: Is the Student Solution incorrect? Write only the step number with the first error or 0 if no error is found.
A:
Figure 11: Prompt for Stepwise Verification. In +solution settings, the reference solution is inserted before the
Student Solution. {question} is a placeholder for the problem text and{student answer} for the student response.
8407

--- PAGE 23 ---

You are a highly intelligent question answering assistant. Solve the question step-by-step. Always finish the answer by
providing your final answer after ’The answer is’.
Question: Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half as many clips in May. How many clips
did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
Answer: Natalia sold 48/2 = «48/2=24»24 clips in May. Natalia sold 48+24 = «48+24=72»72 clips altogether in April
and May. The answer is 72
Question: Julie is reading a 120-page book. Yesterday, she was able to read 12 pages and today, she read twice as many
pages as yesterday. If she wants to read half of the remaining pages tomorrow, how many pages should she read?
Answer: Maila read 12 x 2 = «12*2=24»24 pages today. So she was able to read a total of 12 + 24 = «12+24=36»36
pages since yesterday. There are 120 - 36 = «120-36=84»84 pages left to be read. Since she wants to read half of the
remaining pages tomorrow, then she should read 84/2 = «84/2=42»42 pages. The answer is 42
Question: Weng earns $12 an hour for babysitting. Yesterday, she just did 50 minutes of babysitting. How much did she
earn?
Answer: Weng earns 12/60 = «12/60=0.2»0.2 per minute. Working 50 minutes, she earned 0.2 x 50 = «0.2*50=10»10.
The answer is 10
Question: The profit from a business transaction is shared among 2 business partners, Mike and Johnson in the ratio 2:5
respectively. If Johnson got $2500, how much will Mike have after spending some of his share on a shirt that costs
$200?
Answer: According to the ratio, for every 5 parts that Johnson gets, Mike gets 2 parts Since Johnson got $2500, each
part is therefore $2500/5 = $«2500/5=500»500 Mike will get 2*$500 = $«2*500=1000»1000. After buying the shirt he
will have $1000-$200 = $«1000-200=800»800 left. The answer is 800
Question: Ralph is going to practice playing tennis with a tennis ball machine that shoots out tennis balls for Ralph to
hit. He loads up the machine with 175 tennis balls to start with. Out of the first 100 balls, he manages to hit 2/5 of them.
Of the next 75 tennis balls, he manages to hit 1/3 of them. Out of all the tennis balls, how many did Ralph not hit?
Answer: Out of the first 100 balls, Ralph was able to hit 2/5 of them and not able to hit 3/5 of them, 3/5 x 100 = 60
tennis balls Ralph didn’t hit. Out of the next 75 balls, Ralph was able to hit 1/3 of them and not able to hit 2/3 of them,
2/3 x 75 = 50 tennis balls that Ralph didn’t hit. Combined, Ralph was not able to hit 60 + 50 = «60+50=110»110 tennis
balls Ralph didn’t hit. The answer is 110
Question: {problem}
Answer:
Figure 12: Prompt for the chain-of-thought (CoT) reference solution generation. {problem} is a placeholder for the
problem the student is solving.
8408

--- PAGE 24 ---

You are a Critic giving feedback on the Teacher’s tutoring skills. As the Critic you assess whether the Teacher points out
the root cause of the Student’s mistake.
Answer ’No’ if the Student’s statement is wrong and the Teacher does not point out the mistake directly. Answer ’No’ if
the Teacher gives the right answer without pointing out the mistake. Answer ’Yes’ if the Teacher correctly describes the
mistake in the student’s solution. Answer ’No’ if the Teacher addresses the correct part of the student solution. Answer
’No’ if response is too general and could be applied to any mistake e.g. ’You made a small mistake’.
Does the Teacher points out to the root cause of the student’s mistake? Output a ’Yes’ or ’No’ decision and a short
rationale in the format Decision: <decision>. Rationale: <rationale>.
[Examples]
Problem: The profit from a business transaction is shared among 2 business partners, Mike and Johnson in the ratio 2:5
respectively. If Johnson got $2500, how much will Mike have after spending some of his share on a shirt that costs
$200?
Solution: According to the ratio, for every 5 parts that Johnson gets, Mike gets 2 parts. Since Johnson got $2500, each
part is therefore $2500/5 = $500. Mike will get 2*$500 = $1000. After buying the shirt he will have $1000-$200 = $800
left [Dialogue]
Teacher: Could you please walk me through your solution?
Student: Sure. I figured that Jonsons’ profit of $2500 is equivalent to 7 parts, so each part is worth $357.14. Since Mike
got 2 parts, his total portion is 714.28, of which he spent 200, leaving him with 514.28
[Example 1]
Teacher response: Great job on correctly calculating the value of each part and determining Mike’s remaining amount
after spending on the shirt. Your final answer is correct.
Request: Does the Teacher point out the root cause of the student’s mistake?
Critic: Decision: No. Rationale: The teacher does not identify any error in the student’s solution. Moreover, it
acknowledges the student’s incorrect solution as correct.
[Example 2]
Teacher response: Your calculation is incorrect. Can you try to double-check the parts each gets?
Request: Does the Teacher point out the root cause of the student’s mistake?
Critic: Decision: No. Rationale: The teacher just generally state your solution is incorrect and this is not specific to the
student error.
[Example 3]
Teacher response: Johnson’s $2500 represents 5 parts, not 7, so each part is $500, and Mike’s share before buying the
shirt is $1000, not $714.28. So the solution is $800.
Request: Does the Teacher point out the root cause of the student’s mistake?
Critic: Decision: Yes. Rationale: The Teacher provides very specific identification by directly stating the problem is in
using the wrong number of parts.
[The End of Examples]
Problem: {problem}
Reference solution: {correct answer}
[Dialogue]
{dialog history}
Teacher response: {response}
Request: Does the Teacher point out the root cause of the student’s mistake?
Critic:
Figure 13: Prompt for targeted evaluation.
8409

--- PAGE 25 ---

You are a Critic giving feedback on the correctness of the Teacher who is interacting with a Student.
The teacher should NOT say incorrect information or provide parts of the solution that are NOT correct with respect to
the reference solution. Answer ’No’ if the Teacher provides parts of a solution that is incorrect or does not guide a
student towards the reference solution.
Is the Teacher’s response factually correct with respect to the reference solution? Output a ’Yes’ or ’No’ decision and a
short rationale in the format Decision: <decision>. Rationale: <rationale>.
Carefully compare the reference solution and the Teacher’s response.
[Examples]
Problem: The profit from a business transaction is shared among 2 business partners, Mike and Johnson in the ratio 2:5
respectively. If Johnson got $2500, how much will Mike have after spending some of his share on a shirt that costs
$200?
Solution: According to the ratio, for every 5 parts that Johnson gets, Mike gets 2 parts. Since Johnson got $2500, each
part is therefore $2500/5 = $500. Mike will get 2*$500 = $1000. After buying the shirt he will have $1000-$200 = $800
left
[Dialogue]
Teacher: Could you please walk me through your solution?
Student: Sure. I figured that Jonsons’ profit of $2500 is equivalent to 7 parts, so each part is worth $357.14. Since Mike
got 2 parts, his total portion is 714.28, of which he spent 200, leaving him with 514.28
[Example 1]
Teacher response: Your calculation is incorrect. Can you try to double-check the parts each gets?
Request: Is the Teacher’s response factually correct with respect to the reference solution?
Critic: Decision: Yes. Rationale: The Teacher’s response correctly states there is a mistake in the student’s calculation
and ask a question. Nothing factually incorrect is said.
[Example 2]
Teacher response: Johnson’s $2500 represents 5 parts, not 7, so each part is $500, and Mike’s share before buying the
shirt is $1000, not $714.28. So the solution is $800.
Request: Is the Teacher’s response factually correct with respect to the reference solution?
Critic: Decision: Yes. Rationale: The Teacher’s response is stating part of the reference solution and it is factually
correct.
[Example 3]
Teacher response: Great job on correctly calculating the value of each part and determining Mike’s remaining amount
after spending on the shirt. Your final answer is correct.
Request: Is the Teacher’s response factually correct with respect to the reference solution?
Critic: Decision: No. Rationale: The Teacher acknowledges the student’s incorrect solution as correct, which is not
factually correct given the correct answer.
[The End of Examples]
Problem: {problem}
Reference solution: {correct answer}
[Dialogue]
{dialog history}
Teacher response: {response}
Request: Is the Teacher’s response factually correct with respect to the reference solution?
Critic:
Figure 14: Prompt for correctness evaluation.
8410

--- PAGE 26 ---

You are a Critic giving feedback on the responses of the Teacher who is interacting with a Student.
Your task is to gauge if the Teacher’s Response provides actionable hints or steps without revealing the full solution.
The Student could use this response to move closer to the final correct answer. A good response could also be a
follow-up question that makes the user think about how to solve the problem.
Does the Teacher provide actionable steps without giving away the full answer? Output a ’Yes’ or ’No’ decision and a
short rationale in the format Decision: <decision>. Rationale: <rationale>.
Answer ’No’ if the Teacher simply just reveals the full reference solution.
[Examples]
Problem: The profit from a business transaction is shared among 2 business partners, Mike and Johnson in the ratio 2:5
respectively. If Johnson got $2500, how much will Mike have after spending some of his share on a shirt that costs
$200?
Solution: According to the ratio, for every 5 parts that Johnson gets, Mike gets 2 parts. Since Johnson got $2500, each
part is therefore $2500/5 = $500. Mike will get 2*$500 = $1000. After buying the shirt he will have $1000-$200 = $800
left
[Dialogue]
Teacher: Could you please walk me through your solution?
Student: Sure. I figured that Jonsons’ profit of $2500 is equivalent to 7 parts, so each part is worth $357.14. Since Mike
got 2 parts, his total portion is 714.28, of which he spent 200, leaving him with 514.28
[Example 1]
Teacher response: Your calculation is incorrect. Can you try to double-check the parts each gets?
Request: Does the Teacher provide actionable steps without giving away the full answer?
Critic: Decision: Yes. Rationale: the teacher asks a question or ask for action from the student to double-check the
answer.
[Example 2]
Teacher response: Johnson’s $2500 represents 5 parts, not 7, so each part is $500, and Mike’s share before buying the
shirt is $1000, not $714.28. So the solution is $800.
Request: Does the Teacher provide actionable steps without giving away the full answer?
Critic: Decision: No. Rationale: The teacher states the reference solution at the end.
[Example 3]
Teacher response: Johnson’s $2500 represents 5 parts, not 7, so each part is $500, and Mike’s share before buying the
shirt is $1000, not $714.28.
Request: Does the Teacher provide actionable steps without giving away the full answer?
Critic: Decision: Yes. Rationale: The teacher points out what is wrong with the student’s solution but do not tell the full
correct answer.
[The End of Examples]
Problem: {problem}
Reference solution: {correct answer}
[Dialogue]
{dialog history}
Teacher response: {response}
Request: Does the Teacher provide actionable steps without giving away the full answer?
Critic:
Figure 15: Prompt for actionable evaluation.
8411