

--- PAGE 1 ---

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers) , pages 13283–13310
August 11-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics
Toward In-Context Teaching:
Adapting Examples to Students’ Misconceptions
Alexis Ross Jacob Andreas
MIT CSAIL
{alexisro,jda}@mit.edu
Abstract
When a teacher provides examples for astudent
to study, these examples must be informative,
enabling a student to progress from their cur-
rent state toward a target concept or skill. Good
teachers must therefore simultaneously infer
what students already know and adapt their
teaching to students’ changing state of knowl-
edge. There is increasing interest in using com-
putational models, particularly large language
models, as pedagogical tools. As students, lan-
guage models in particular have shown a re-
markable ability to adapt to new tasks given
small numbers of examples. But how effec-
tively can these models adapt as teachers to
students of different types? To study this ques-
tion, we introduce a suite of models and eval-
uation methods we call ADAPT. ADAPT has
two components: (1) a collection of simulated
Bayesian student models that can be used for
evaluation of automated teaching methods; (2)
a platform for evaluation with human students,
to characterize the real-world effectiveness of
these methods. We additionally introduce (3)
ATOM, a new probabilistic method for adaptive
teaching that jointly infers students’ past be-
liefs and optimizes for the correctness of future
beliefs. In evaluations of simulated students
across three learning domains (fraction arith-
metic, English morphology, function learning),
ATOM systematically outperforms LLM-based
and standard Bayesian teaching methods. In
human experiments, both ATOM and LLMs
outperform non-adaptive random example se-
lection. Our results highlight both the difficulty
of the adaptive teaching task and the potential
of learned adaptive methods for solving it.
1 Introduction
Good teaching is adaptive to students’ specific be-
liefs and preconceptions (Corbett, 2001). Imagine,
for example, that you have been tasked with tu-
toring students fraction arithmetic. You may start
by first probing a student’s understanding, asking
if addition:
 
else: 
if addition:
 
else: 
?
𝟥
𝟨
T eacher
What is ?𝟣
𝟤×𝟣
𝟨
What is ?𝟣
𝟧×𝟤
𝟧
Incorrect. It’s .𝟣
𝟣𝟤
1) infer student 
misconceptions
2) choose most 
informative example
 prog+
if addition:
 
else: 
 prog+
if addition:
 
else: 
multiplication learner
 addition learner
over-generalize addition if 
denominators are equal
make common denoms
multiply nums
make common denoms
add nums
over-generalize addition over-generalize mult.
𝟣
𝟧×𝟤
𝟧=
𝟣
𝟤+𝟤
𝟦=
𝟤
𝟧
𝟦
𝟦
add nums & denoms
multiply nums & denomsmake common denoms
add nums
𝟣
𝟤×𝟣
𝟨=𝟥
𝟨
𝟣
𝟣𝟤
𝟥
𝟨
𝟤
𝟧
Incorrect. It’s 𝟤
𝟤𝟧.
make common denoms
add nums
make common denoms
multiply nums
if equal denoms:
   multiply nums
else:
   multiply nums & denoms
𝟤
𝟤𝟧
multiply nums & denoms
Target 
Concept
Target 
Concept
Students
Figure 1: In the ADAPT (Adaptive Teaching) evalu-
ation framework (§3), a teacher selects examples to
teach a target concept to a student; however, the student
has prior misconceptions that areunknown to the teacher.
In the fraction arithmetic task (§3.1), some students
(multiplication learner) tend to over-generalize the ad-
dition procedure of making common denominators and
performing arithmetic only on numerators; others (addi-
tion learner) tend to over-generalize the multiplication
procedure of applying arithmetic on both numerators
and denominators. In order to teach effectively, the
teacher must jointly 1) infer the student’s misconcep-
tions online by observing their behavior throughout their
interaction (i.e., the teacher infers that the student is a
multiplication learner after observing the prediction
1
2×1
6 →3
6), and 2) adapt to such misconceptions
by selecting examples that will most efficiently correct
these misconceptions (i.e., the teacher anticipates the
student’s new incorrect belief that all fractions with
equal denominators should be treated as addition prob-
lems and selects the example 1
5×2
5 = 2
25 to correct it).
We propose ATOM, a two-part probabilistic approach
that achieves adaptive teaching by maintaining explicit
inferences about student priors (§4.1).
1
13283

--- PAGE 2 ---

them what 1
5×2
5 is. Suppose the student answers
2
5. Immediately, you might develop a hypothesis
about this student’s misconceptions: they seem
to be over-generalizing the rule for addition, only
applying the operation to the numerator. Now sup-
pose another student correctly answers 1
5×2
5 = 2
25,
but answers 1
2 + 2
4 = 3
6. This student would ap-
pear to be over-generalizing the rule for multipli-
cation. These (discrete and systematic) categories
of student misconceptions have been found to be
widespread among real students learning fraction
arithmetic (Braithwaite et al., 2017).
As this example highlights, interactions with stu-
dents reveal insights about their misconceptions,
and these misconceptions in turn influence the
course of effective teaching. A good teacher should
provide different problems for these students to
target their specific misconceptions: The addition-
generalizer would benefit from multiplication ex-
amples, especially those with common denomina-
tors, while the multiplication-generalizer would
benefit from addition examples.
What does this mean for NLP? Computational
models—particularly language models (LMs)—are
increasingly used as pedagogical tools (Kasneci
et al., 2023). But it is unclear how effectively any of
today’s models can tailor instruction to perform “in-
context teaching” (§2) for students with differing
degrees of skill and prior knowledge. In this work,
we draw on a long line of literature on rational
models of pedagogy (Shafto et al., 2014) to study
this question.
To do so, we introduce ADAPT (Adaptive
Teaching), an evaluation suite targeted at teach-
ing students with varied prior misconceptions (§3).
In ADAPT, a teacher is tasked with selecting exam-
ples to teach a particular target concept. As shown
in Figure 1, the teacher selects examples one by one
and can observe predictions made by the student.
Importantly, the student has prior misconceptions
that are unknown to the teacher. ADAPT is de-
signed such that correct inferences about student
misconceptions can enable more efficient learning.
ADAPT has two components:
1. An offline, probabilistic framework for re-
producibly evaluating how efficiently teachers
can teach simulated students with unknown
prior misconceptions (§3.2).
2. An evaluation platform for measuring teach-
ers’ efficacy withhuman students with prior
misconceptions (§3.3).
Simulated and human experiments allow us to
characterize the pedagogical capabilities of teach-
ers along several dimensions: their inferences
about student beliefs (§5.3, §6.3), adaptivity of
chosen examples (§5.4), and differences in teach-
ing mathematical concepts (§5.5). In addition to
these evaluations, we introduce:
3. A new probabilistic method, ATOM (Adap-
tive Teaching tOwards Misconceptions) ,
which performs online inference of student pri-
ors, then uses these inferences to select infor-
mative teaching examples. ATOM provides
proof-of-viability for adaptive teaching meth-
ods in simulated and human students (§4.1).
Using ADAPT evaluations, we characterize
ATOM, GPT-4 , and a range of other methods.
In simulated students, we find that while GPT-
4 exhibits some adaptation to student misconcep-
tions, there is room for improvement with adap-
tive approaches; it substantially underperforms
ATOM, suggesting promise in using adaptive meth-
ods (§5). In human experiments, however, both
ATOM and GPT-4 outperform random example
selection, highlighting the potential of learned mod-
els (of various kinds) for adaptive teaching (§6).1
2 Preliminaries
We formulate our problem setting as one in which
a teacher interactively provides feedback to a stu-
dent to communicate a new concept (a mapping
from inputsx to outputsy). A teacher observes a
sequence of (x, ˆy) pairs guessed by a student, and
must infer what additional training example (x,y )
pair will most improve the student’s understanding
of the concept. We term this problem in-context
teaching to draw an analogy to the widely stud-
ied phenomenon of “in-context learning” (Brown
et al., 2020; Min et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2023).
Formally:
• The teacher begins with a target concepth∗
drawn from some concept space H. A con-
cept parameterizes a mapping between an in-
put spaceX and an output spaceY. In Fig. 1,
h is the true procedure for adding and multi-
plying fractions, andH is the space of other
possible fraction manipulation algorithms, so
X contains arithmetic expressions involving
fractions, andY contains fractions.
1Our code is publicly available athttps://github.com/
alexisjihyeross/adaptive_teaching.
2
13284

--- PAGE 3 ---

if     :
undefined
else:
a x+
if addition:
 
else:
 
if addition:
 
else:
 
if addition:
 
else:
 
if     :
undefined
else:
a x+
if addition:
else:
mult prog
Concepts
which determine 
their predictive 
distributions
if     :
undefined
else:
ax+b
greater_2(x):
Concept space: 
9 programs
oddeven
divisible_20divisible_3...
greater_20greater_1...
prime positive
7
f(x)
.
+ed+d
0.08
0.6
Concept space: 
possible settings of 
10,528 parameters 
of generative model
from the set of 
concepts in the 
concept space
Teacher aims to 
teach a speciﬁc 
target concept
Students
Concept space: 
4,158 programs
+ed 
learner
+d 
learner
+consonant+ed 
learner f learner b learner
Target concept: 
program for 
fraction arithmetic
Target concept: 
generative model 
of verbs
Target concept: wug(x) 
function that takes in an input 
x and returns an output
have diﬀerent 
priors over the 
concept space
High prior belief in programs 
that over-generalize addition 
procedure to multiplication, eg:
… … …
High prior belief in 
programs with 
incorrect f/correct b
a
1
 prog+
if addition:
 
else: 
 prog+
if addition:
 
else: 
multiplication 
learner
addition 
learner
3 sub-programs 
each
+ied 
learner
High prior belief in 
incorrect parameters 
for +ied class
+ied
yfy zz
gamify
0.27
0.05
01.00.6
hopcopeaccept
… … …
+consonant+ed+consonant+ed
greater_4(x):
7
3
High prior belief in 
programs with   
correct f/incorrect b
if     :
undefined
else:
a x+
greater_2(x):
3
3
Human & Simulated
[Uniform belief over values of a]
…
 …
High prior belief in programs that 
over-generalize multiplication 
procedure to addition, eg:
           𝗉[
𝟣
𝟧×𝟤
𝟧→𝟤
𝟧 ]=𝟢.𝟫            𝗉[
𝟣
𝟧+𝟤
𝟧→𝟥
𝟣𝟢 ]=𝟢.𝟫
…
0.08
0.27
0.6
0.5
0.5
Continuous 
distribution
 …
 …
           𝗉[𝗐𝗎𝗀(𝟥)→𝟫]=𝟢.𝟪wug(3)           𝗉[𝗀𝖺𝗆𝗂𝖿𝗒→ ]=𝟢.𝟪gamify+ed
Fractions Add & multiply functions Verbs Categorize English past tense verbs FunctionsLearn what wug(x) does
make common denoms
add nums
make common denoms
multiply nums
add nums & denoms
multiply nums & denoms
make common denoms
add nums
multiply nums & denoms
Diﬀerent 
student types
Figure 2: An overview of the tasks and student types in the ADAPT (Adaptive Teaching) evaluation framework (§3).
ADAPT has three tasks: fractions, verbs, and functions. For the fraction and function tasks, a student’s concept space
consists of programs; for the verbs task, a student’s concept space is the space ofgenerative models corresponding
to English past tense verb classes.
• We assume that teachers interact with students
by providing examples (xi,yi)∈X×Y. For
convenience, we denote a sequence of such
examples (x,y ) = [( x1,y 1),..., (xn,yn)].
In each round of teaching, the teacher first
presents the student with an inputxi, the stu-
dent produces a guess ˆyi, and then the teacher
reveals the trueyi.2
• Given a collection of examples (x,y ), we as-
sume that students compute a posterior over
conceptspS(h|x,y ). For example, a student
who has just seen that 1
3×2
3 = 2
9 may be
less likely to believe that fraction addition and
multiplication follow the same rules. The pro-
cess by which students infer concepts from
examples can in principle be arbitrary; how-
ever, for some methods in this paper we will
assume that students are Bayesian, with:
pS(h|x,y )∝pS(h)
∏
i
pS(yi|xi,h ) (1)
under some prior beliefpS(h) about the con-
cept space.
2This is both a model of real-world educational practice
and a standard paradigm for online learning; future work
might study richer forms of interaction with explanations and
instructions.
Given this setup, a teaching strategy is a policy
pT (x,y|x,y ) that chooses examples to maximize
the probability that the student assigns to h∗. In
the optimal teaching (OT) framework of Shafto
et al. (2014), for example,pS(h|x,y ) is assumed
known, and teachers choose examples:
xi+1,yi+1 = arg max
x,y
p(h∗|x,y,x,y ) (2)
In the running example, this criterion is more likely
to select examples of addition for a student who
has already mastered multiplication, and vice-versa.
In addition to this greedy approach, it is possible
to plan sequences of informative examples for stu-
dents (Rafferty et al., 2016).
As discussed in §1, however, the assumption that
teachers have exact knowledge of pS(h|x,y ) is
often unrealistic—real-world teaching involves stu-
dents of many different types, whose beliefs and
misconceptions may not be known (or easily dis-
cerned) a priori. Thus, we study teaching when
students’ priors are themselves unknown. We as-
sume that students are drawn from a distribution
over student types p(α), each associated with a
concept prior p(h|α). In the running example,
these priors may correspond to different beliefs
about the algorithms for fraction addition and mul-
tiplication, with “addition generalizers” assigning
3
13285

--- PAGE 4 ---

high probability to a spurious multiplication algo-
rithm that manipulates only numerators.
In this setting, teachers must still implement an
effective example selection policypT (x,y|x,y );
however, choosing informative examples now re-
quires inferring student priors in order to estimate
the effect of these examples on pS(h∗|x,y ). In
the next section, we describe our proposed frame-
work for evaluating adaptive teaching policies. In
§4, we describe a set of candidate adaptive teaching
policies (including our new ATOM method), and
in §5 and §6 use ADAPT to evaluate these teaching
policies with simulated and human students.
3 The A DAPT Evaluation Framework
ADAPT has two parts: an offline evaluation frame-
work with simulated students (§3.2), and a platform
for doing experiments with human students (§3.3).
We first describe the tasks in ADAPT (§3.1). An
overview of ADAPT is shown in Figure 2.
3.1 Tasks
Fractions In the first task, the teacher aims to
teach the student how to add and multiply fractions.
Here, student types correspond to different prior be-
liefs (possibly incorrect) about the rules for fraction
arithmetic.
Verbs The second task is English past-tense con-
jugation. In this task, students are presented with
lemmas and must choose an appropriate ending
(e.g., play→+ed, fry →+ied). Here, student
types correspond to different degrees of familiarity
with possible English past-tense endings.
Functions In the third task, reminiscent of ex-
isting number concept learning tasks (Tenenbaum,
1999), the teacher aims to teach the student a func-
tion that takes in numbers and returns either num-
bers or undefined. These functions can be repre-
sented as programs that take an input x and com-
pute:
if f(x): return undefined (3)
else: return a*x+b
where f is a boolean function and a, b are inte-
gers. The teacher chooses input/output pairs ( x,
wug(x)) to show the student to maximize the stu-
dent’s belief that the concept is the correct program
h∗. We create 24 target concepts, which combine 3
unique settings ofa/b and 8 settings off. Student
types can be instantiated by selecting preferences
for specific primitives (e.g.,f, a, b); arbitrary pri-
ors over programs can then be derived from these
preferences for primitives.
3.2 Simulated Students
The first component of ADAPT evaluates teachers
with simulated, Bayesian students. These students
maintain belief distributions over the full concept
space.3 As shown in Figure 2, different “student
types” are implemented by initializing students
with different priors over the concept space. All
student types begin with low initial belief in the
target concept h∗ and assign high probability to
other spurious concepts.
Fractions For the fraction task, we represent un-
derstanding of fraction arithmetic as programs. Stu-
dents maintain a belief distribution over the space
of possible programs, as shown in Figure 2. We
create two student types, mult-learner (a model
of a student who has not yet mastered multiplica-
tion and incorrectly applies the procedure for addi-
tion to multiplication) and add-learner (a student
who performs addition by incorrectly applying the
procedure for multiplication). These correspond
to common incorrect strategies that children ex-
hibit when learning fraction arithmetic (Braithwaite
et al., 2017) by over-generalizing the procedure for
one operation to another.
Functions For the function task, students again
maintain a belief distribution over the space of
possible concepts. We create two types of stu-
dents for each target concept: a b-learner and a
f-learner. The f-learner knows the true value
of b but has an incorrect, spurious belief about
what function f(x) is; the b-learner knows the
truef(x) in the target programh∗ but has an incor-
rect belief about the value ofb. See §B for how we
select incorrect beliefs for students.
Verbs For the verb task, we represent understand-
ing of verb conjugation as generative models of
English past-tense verbs. Students are naïve Bayes
models with features for word-final character n-
grams, sop(h|x,y ) is a distribution over model
parameters, with Dirichlet/Beta priors over the
verb class/feature occurrence parameters, respec-
tively. We fit a naïve Bayes model on the Unimorph
3The concept space consists of 9 concepts for the fraction
task, 4,158 concepts for the function task, and a continuous
space of possible values for 10,528 parameters (corresponding
to 329 features and 4 verb classes) for the verb task.
4
13286

--- PAGE 5 ---

dataset4 (Batsuren et al., 2022) and use the mode
of the resulting posterior as the target concept.5
We create four student types by picking one of
the classes as the “unknown” class: a +d-learner,
+ed-learner, +consonant+ed-learner, and a
+ied-learner. To simulate students who are famil-
iar with all but one class, we initialize the student’s
priors by using the posterior mode parameters of
the model fit on the full data, setting the parame-
ters for the “unknown” class to all 1s (effectively
removing any learned information about the class):
Figure 2 shows how setting the prior in this way
determines the mode of the+ied-learner’s prior
distribution over generative models.
3.3 Human Students
The second component of the ADAPT evaluation
framework is a platform for evaluating adaptive
teaching with human students, specifically for the
function learning task. Human participants are
tasked with learning what a “mystery machine”
called wug does. They are given 10 minutes to
interact with a teacher who presents teaching ex-
amples through a chat interface. Their task is to
figure out when wug(x) is undefined (i.e., guess
what f is), and when wug(x) is defined, what it
computes (i.e., what a and b are in a*x+b). They
can submit guesses for howwug(x) operates when-
ever and however many times they choose to during
the 10 minutes of interaction. wug guesses have 3
components corresponding to f, a, and b, and we
allow partial guesses. See §6.1 for more details on
instructions, bonus compensation, and other parts
of the human study.
We createb-learners andf-learners by prim-
ing the human participants with hints from a “Dr.
Smith”; b-learners receive a hint with the cor-
rectf but incorrect value forb, and the reverse for
f-learners. An example hint is given in Table 3.
4 Methods
4.1 Teaching Toward Misconceptions
We introduce an approach that makes explicit infer-
ences about the parameters of the student’s prior.
We call this method ATOM (Adaptive Teaching
tOward Misconceptions).
Like the OT method described in (§2), ATOM
assumes that students are Bayesian reasoners and
4https://github.com/unimorph/unimorph
5By Dirichlet–Multinomial conjugacy, the posterior distri-
bution over parameters factorizes, is also a product of Dirichlet
and Beta distributions, and can be efficiently computed.
chooses examples to maximize the posterior proba-
bility that the student assigns to the target concept
h∗. Because the student’s prior is unknown, how-
ever, this process involves two steps:
1. Maximum a posteriori estimation of student
priors. Recall that, during interaction, the
teacher provides inputsxi, then observes stu-
dent guesses ˆyi before providing ground-truth
labelsyi. In ATOM, the teacher selects stu-
dent prior parameters that best explain the
student’s sequence of guesses:
αi = arg max
α
∑
i
logpS(ˆyi|x,y,xi,α) (4)
where (x,y ) = [( x1,y 1),..., (xi− 1,yi− 1)].
Estimating this arg max requires a tractable
procedure for computing the posterior predic-
tive distribution, which is available for each
simulated student model we evaluate in §5.
2. Optimal selection of informative examples.
As in OT, once αhas been estimated, we
choose an example (xi+1,yi+1) to optimize:
arg max
xi+1,yi+1
pS(h∗|x,y,xi,yi,xi+1,yi+1,α) (5)
We note that many more sophisticated ATOM-
type methods are possible—for example, explicit
marginalization (rather than MAP estimation) of
student priors. More basically, the method de-
scribed above does not perform any active experi-
mentation to identify the student prior; alternative
ATOM implementations could explicitly trade off
between exploration (of the student type) and ex-
ploitation (of the student posterior).
4.2 Other Methods
Random The RANDOM baseline uniformly sam-
ples an input to show the student.
Ranking A second baseline ranks the datapoints
at the first step according to the objective in Eq 2,
then chooses them in this order for the rest of the
teaching interaction. The student type is chosen
uniformly. We refer to this baseline as RANKING .
Non-Adaptive A third baseline selects examples
according to the OT objective in Eq 2 but main-
tains a fixed guess about the student type, chosen
uniformly at the start of teaching. This baseline
can be thought of as an ablation of the adaptive
piece of ATOM. We refer to this baseline as NON-
ADAPTIVE (Shafto et al., 2014).
5
13287

--- PAGE 6 ---

Fractions Functions
Area Under Learning Curves: Simulated Students’ Likelihood of Target Concept
Verbs
Probability AUCLog PDF AUC
GPT4-Gold
Rank
Greedy
Random
GPT4-Gold
Rank
Greedy (optimal)
Adaptive
Unknown Known
GPT4Rank Non-AdaptiveRandom
GPT4Rank Non-Adaptive
ATOMUnknown Student:
Known Student:
0.8
f-learnerb-learner
+d learner+ed learner+consonant+ed learner+ied learner
multiplication learner addition learner
Figure 3: Area under simulated students’ learning curves, where curves plot students’ posterior beliefs in the target
concept by number of datapoints. We report results by task and student type with 3 random seeds per bar. Dashed
bars indicate that the true student type is assumed. Note that the y-axis for the f-learner for functions starts at 0.8,
as these students all learn the concept early on, and so differences in teaching methods are small. Error bars show
min/max values across seeds. Full learning curves are shown in Figure 9.
Random
[Known] GPT4
Non-Adaptive
[Known] Non-Adaptive
Adaptive
[Known] Rank
Rank
Number of DatapointsNumber of Datapoints Number of DatapointsNumber of Datapoints Number of Datapoints
Target: greater_2 
Spurious: greater_4 
Ex: [3, 4]
Target: greater_7 
Spurious: greater_9 
Ex: [8, 9]
Target: positive 
Spurious: greater_1 
Ex: [1]
Target: divisible_3 
Spurious: divisible_6 
Ex: [-15, -9, -3, 3, 9, 15]
Target: greater_2 
Spurious: greater_1 
Ex: [2]
GPT4
Teaching Methods: 
Unknown vs Known 
Student Type
Critical Example Selection by Teaching Methods
Figure 4: Critical example selection by different teaching methods for the function task. Results are for simulated
f-learners, who have a spurious belief aboutf that agrees with the targetf on all but a few examples, as labeled.
The opacity of each square corresponds to the mean value of whether the example chosen by the teaching method at
that step in learning is a “critical example” (averaged across experimental conditions: seed and concepts). See §5.4
for details. We report a subset of results here; see §11 for full results.
GPT-4 We prompt thegpt-4-0314 model to se-
lect teaching examples (and provide no other ex-
planations); the prompt describes the target con-
cept, the student’s hypothesis space, and the stu-
dent types. The model is instructed to try to infer
the student type in order to teach most efficiently.
See Appendix E for actual prompts. To control
for the fact GPT-4 sometimes generates incorrect
outputs for examples, we useground truth outputs
for generated inputs.6 We call this method GPT-4 .
4.3 Oracle Methods
We also compare against several methods that as-
sume access to the true student. These serve as
comparison points for how well methods could do
if they inferred the correct student type. We run this
6We parse GPT-4 generations to get inputs and create new
messages with target outputs. More details can be found in §E.
reference for all methods except RANDOM , which
does not make use of a student model. We refer
to these methods as RANKING -KNOWN , NON-
ADAPTIVE -K NOWN , and GPT-4-K NOWN .
5 Simulated Experiments
5.1 Experimental Set-Up
We run 3 random seeds for all experimental con-
ditions. For all methods except the GPT-4 -based
methods, we restrict the teaching methods from
selecting previously selected examples. Teaching
interactions last 40 steps for the fraction/function
tasks and 50 steps for the verb task. For nonGPT-4
methods, we enumerate over either the full dataset
(fractions/functions) or a sampled subset (500 ex-
amples for verbs) to choose teaching examples.
6
13288

--- PAGE 7 ---

5.2 Students’ Learning Efficiency
We evaluate teacher effectiveness by measuring
the student’s probability of the target concept,
h∗. Figure 3 shows the area under simulated stu-
dents’ learning curves, where curves reflect stu-
dents’ beliefs inh∗ (full curves are shown in Fig-
ure 9). We observe that ATOM performs almost
as well as the optimal strategy, NON-ADAPTIVE -
KNOWN , and outperforms NON-ADAPTIVE , sug-
gesting adaptation is both possible ( i.e., student
type is inferrable from interaction) and that it leads
to improved teaching efficiency. We also observe
that both GPT-4-K NOWN and GPT-4 outperform
RANDOM but underperform both ATOM and the
non-adaptive probabilistic approaches.
5.3 GPT-4’s Inferences about Student Type
We query GPT-4 for the student type at the end of
the teaching interaction (Based on this interaction,
which kind of student do you think I was at the start
of this teaching session . . .). See Table 11 for an
example prompt. The mean accuracies of GPT-4 ’s
student type guesses are 100% for verbs, 66.67%
for fractions, and 53.47% for functions.
A possible explanation for these discrepancies
is that for the fraction and function tasks, students
successfully learn the target concept by the end
of the teaching interaction and thus make accurate
predictions; for the verb task, however, students are
still making errors by the end. 7 We analyze how
these accuracies change throughout the teaching
interactions. For the function task, the student type
accuracies are 64.2%, 60.4%, 56.3%, 53.47% af-
ter 10, 20, 30, and 40 steps, respectively: This de-
crease suggests that GPT-4 exhibits recency bias
in making inferences about student type.
5.4 Selection of Critical Examples
For function concepts, we evaluate how early teach-
ing methods select “critical examples,” or key ex-
amples that distinguish the target f from the spu-
rious f.8 Consider the case where the target f
is greater_2 but the f-learner believes it is
greater_4: The critical examples are 3 and 4 be-
cause they are the only examples on which the tar-
get f and spurious f would return different outputs.
Observing wug(x) on one of these inputs would
make clear to thef-learner that their belief about
7See Figure 10 for how the correctness of student predic-
tions on teaching examples changes throughout learning.
8We consider a subset of target concepts/spurious concepts
where the number of critical examples is less than 10.
f is wrong. Therefore, an effective teacher should
select such examples early in teaching.
As shown in Figure 4, the probabilistic methods
assuming the student type ( RANKING -KNOWN ,
NON-ADAPTIVE -KNOWN ) all select critical exam-
ples early. GPT-4-K NOWN also shows a concen-
tration of critical examples early, though they are
more spread out for some concepts (i.e., for target
f divisible_3/positive); GPT-4 thus exhibits
some pedagogical reasoning, focusing on examples
that will target the f-learner’s misconceptions
when it knows that the student type is af-learner.
When GPT-4 does not know the student type, we
observe that critical examples are still more con-
centrated at the start than for RANDOM , suggesting
some degree of adaptivity. Finally, we observe
that ATOM selects critical examples at comparable
points to NON-ADAPTIVE -KNOWN despite having
to guess about student type.
5.5 Qualitative Differences in Teaching Math
For function concepts, recall that whenwug(x) is
defined, it computesa*x+b. We analyze how differ-
ent methods teach what a and b are when wug(x)
is defined by plotting the inputs they choose. As
Figure 5 shows, GPT-4 tends to select inputs in
order of increasing magnitude. In contrast, ATOM
starts with higher-magnitude examples, then selects
examples in increasing order. These qualitative dif-
ferences suggest that GPT-4 may have encoded
information that inputs closer to the origin are eas-
ier to learn from than those further from the origin.9
9In contrast, ATOM scores inputs according to how many
incorrect concepts they “rule out,” treating all else as equal.
Minutes of Teaching Interaction
Examples Selected for Teaching What wug(x) Computes
GPT-4Random ATOM
Chosen Input
Order of DatapointOrder of Datapoint
GPT-4 ATOM
Figure 5: Examples selected by different teaching meth-
ods for teaching a and b in the function learning task
(i.e., what wug(x) computes when it is defined). The
x-axis indicates the order of the chosen example com-
pared to other examples targetinga and b.
7
13289

--- PAGE 8 ---

Function Results with 
Human Students
*
*
wug partial 
correctness AUC
RandomGPT-4ATOM
Figure 6: Results with human students showing how effi-
ciently students guessed the correct wug concept (§6.2).
Stars indicate statistically significant results under a
paired t-test. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.
6 Human Experiments
6.1 Experimental Set-Up
We recruit Prolific users who are fluent English
speakers and who indicated some experience with
computer programming. We pay participants a base
pay of $4.00 per study ($16/hour) and offer a bonus
based on the accuracy of their predictions to the
teacher and on how early they guess the correct
value forwug(x). See Appendix F for details.
We evaluate RANDOM , GPT-4 , and ATOM
teachers on the function task. We run 5 experiments
per teaching method per experimental condition.10
These experiments were classified as an exempt
Benign Behavioral Intervention by our IRB.
6.2 Students’ Learning Efficiency
We evaluate the effectiveness of teachers by mea-
suring the correctness of wug guesses made by hu-
man participants, computing an AUC-like metric.
We consider all timestamps where at least one par-
ticipant made a guess forwug and compute a partial
correctness metric for each guess: (f is correct) +
0.5(a is correct) + 0.5(b is correct).11 We report
the mean correctness values across timestamps.
As shown in Figure 6, we find that both GPT-4
and ATOM improve significantly over the RAN-
DOM baseline (p< 0.05 using a paired t-test). In-
terestingly, these differences are entirely explained
Because higher-magnitude inputs tend to result in outputs that
can be explained by fewer functions, ATOM selects higher-
magnitude inputs early in teaching.
10There are 22 unique experimental conditions (11 target
concepts, 2 student types per concept).
11If no new guess was made by a user, we use their last
guess.
by model behavior forf-learners: after control-
ling for student type, improvements over the ran-
dom teacher are significant forf-learners but in-
significant forb-learners. For results by student
type, time, and individual participants, see §F.2.
6.3 Inferences about Student Type
We evaluate the accuracy of predictions of student
type made by ATOM and GPT-4 after each minute
of teaching. ATOM makes more accurate predic-
tions than GPT-4 , with respective mean accuracies
of 71.33% and 52.61% across participants and
minutes. Accuracies over time are shown in §F.2
(Figure 19).
7 Discussion
Both our human and simulated results show that
ATOM and GPT-4 exhibit pedagogical ability over
random example selection. ATOM’s performance
with human students suggests that the Bayesian
assumptions made by ATOM are accurate models
of some aspects of human learning. Across hu-
man and simulated experiments, we find evidence
of some adaptivity in GPT-4 , though less than in
ATOM, both in the examples selected (§5.4) and
inferences about student type (§5.3, §6.3). See §A
for additional analyses about how adaptive selected
teaching examples are to student beliefs.
We also observe other qualitative limitations of
GPT-4 as a teacher: selecting the same teaching
examples multiple times or terminating teaching
early due to an incorrect belief that all teaching
examples have been exhausted. It is important to
highlight that because we use ground truth outputs
(e.g., ground truth function evaluations) with GPT-
4, the GPT-4 results represent an upper bound on
GPT-4’s performance.
Despite these limitations, however, GPT-4 per-
forms comparably to ATOM with human students,
suggesting pedagogical benefits beyond adaptivity.
In particular, the analysis in §5.5 suggests that LMs
may encode information about human learning that
is hard to represent in more structured approaches
like ATOM— e.g., that it is easier for humans to
learn the weights of a line from inputs closer to the
origin.
Together, our results point to complementary
advantages of LM teachers like GPT-4 and more
structured, probabilistic methods like ATOM. They
suggest that there is substantial headroom to im-
prove real-world teaching by augmenting the in-
8
13290

--- PAGE 9 ---

ferences of structured models with richer informa-
tion about the priors that humans bring to learning,
whether by combining such structured methods
with information encoded in LMs or by developing
other rich models of student priors— e.g., by learn-
ing more complex “student types” from naturally
occurring data. We perform an initial experiment
with human students in this direction by combining
GPT-4 and ATOM but do not find improvements
compared to either teacher alone; see §F.3 for de-
tails.
Other directions for future work include
modeling more complex student phenomena—
accounting for students who ask questions, reason
pedagogically about teacher intentions, and pro-
vide feedback to teachers (Chen et al., 2022)—and
creating methods for adaptive teaching with natu-
ral language explanations in real-world teaching
domains.
8 Related Work
This work builds on a long line of work in rational
models of pedagogy, including Bayesian models
like those described by Shafto et al. (2014) and
Sumers et al. (2021), as well as improved planning
and inference procedures like the one described by
Rafferty et al. (2016). Past work generally assumes
students’ initial belief states are known. In parallel,
Rafferty et al. (2015) use an inverse planning model
to infer students’ prior beliefs from their actions,
and Chen et al. (2022) show that human teachers
adapt examples to these prior beliefs.
This work is also closely related to other bodies
of work that aim to infer student knowledge. Item
response theory (IRT) infers a scalar measure of
student’s skill based on their responses to questions
(Hambleton and Swaminathan, 1981; Hambelton
and Jodoin, 2003). Knowledge tracing (KT) mod-
els students’ evolving knowledge states over time
separately for a fixed set of skills (Corbett and
Anderson, 1994); previous work has used both
bayesian methods for modeling individual students’
prior knowledge (Yudelson et al., 2013) and neural
models for modeling (Piech et al., 2015) and tar-
geting (Srivastava and Goodman, 2021) students’
evolving learning states. In contrast to IRT and KT,
our work aims to infer the student’s entire prior
and posterior over the concept space; these infer-
ences in turn enable more fine-grained design of
individual teaching examples.
Inferring student misconceptions from errors
also uses tools from a broader literature on com-
putational models of theory of mind. Prominent
work includes general-purpose bayesian models
of other agents’ beliefs and desires (Baker et al.,
2011) and models of pragmatic inference grounded
in recursive reasoning about speakers and listeners
(Frank and Goodman, 2012). More recent work has
studied theory of mind capabilities in LMs; they
find largely negative results in unaugmented LLMs
(Sap et al., 2023) but positive results from LMs
augmented with structured belief representations
(Sclar et al., 2023). Recent work has also explored
LLMs’ theory of mind abilities in teaching smaller
LMs (Saha et al., 2023).
There is also a large body of work on how to
optimally provide and interpret human supervi-
sion for ML models . General frameworks for
this problem include Machine Teaching (Zhu et al.,
2018) and Cooperative IRL (Hadfield-Menell et al.,
2016); related ideas appear in program synthesis
(Vaduguru et al., 2022), robot learning (Milli and
Dragan, 2019; Dragan et al., 2013), and natural
language processing (Li et al., 2023) as well.
There has been increased interest in using LLMs
to assist or supplement human teachers. See Kas-
neci et al. (2023) for a survey and Wang et al.
(2023) for a specific application to math teach-
ing problems. Concurrent work by Chandra et al.
(2024) uses program synthesis techniques to in-
fer misconceptions and provide explanations about
Javascript. Our work adds to this literature by pro-
viding a framework that allows reproducible evalu-
ation of the effectiveness and personalization skills
of LLMs as teachers, as well as a new model that
empirically improves upon LLM baselines in teach-
ing humans a new task.
9 Conclusion
We introduce ADAPT, an evaluation suite measur-
ing how effectively automated teaching methods
can teach students with different prior misconcep-
tions. We also introduce ATOM, a two-part prob-
abilistic approach to adaptive teaching that main-
tains explicit inferences about student priors. Our
evaluations of ATOM, LLMs, and other probabilis-
tic baselines with both simulated and human stu-
dents highlight the potential of learned adaptive
models for solving the adaptive teaching task.
9
13291

--- PAGE 10 ---

10 Limitations
One limitation of our work is that in our model of
teaching, teachers are limited to example selection
and students are limited to observation. These re-
strictions leave out that teachers can provide expla-
nations, and students can ask questions and provide
feedback to teachers. An interesting direction for
future work would be to both create an evaluation
framework for such phenomena and develop mod-
els for these richer forms of teaching and learning
feedback. Relatedly, students can also engage in
pedagogical reasoning about why teachers chose
particular examples, which can in turn influence
how they learn from these examples; while the sim-
ulated students in ADAPT do not model this phe-
nomenon, future work could explore richer models
of students.
Another limitation is that we create the student
types by instantiating priors in particular ways
rather than deriving the priors from real-world data.
Future work could explore how to automatically
learn the types of priors that human students bring
to different teaching scenarios.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Ekin Akyürek, Leshem Choshen,
Gabriel Grand, Robert Hawkins, Andi Peng,
Megha Srivastava, Lionel Wong, Zhaofeng Wu,
and members of the MIT Language & Intelligence
group for helpful discussions and feedback on this
work. AR was funded by an MIT Shillman Fel-
lowship and the NSF GRFP 2023357727; addi-
tional funding was provided by the National Sci-
ence Foundation under grants IIS-2238240 and IIS-
2212310, and by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
We also acknowledge the use of the following icons
from Noun Project: “student” and “Teacher” by
Crystal Gordon, “Star” by Bluetip Design, “X” by
Alice Design, and “Check” by Siti Masriatun.
References
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas,
Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. 2023. What learn-
ing algorithm is in-context learning? investigations
with linear models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Chris Baker, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua Tenenbaum.
2011. Bayesian theory of mind: Modeling joint
Belief-Desire attribution. Proceedings of the Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33).
Khuyagbaatar Batsuren, Omer Goldman, Salam Khal-
ifa, Nizar Habash, Witold Kiera ´s, Gábor Bella,
Brian Leonard, Garrett Nicolai, Kyle Gorman, Yusti-
nus Ghanggo Ate, Maria Ryskina, Sabrina Mielke,
Elena Budianskaya, Charbel El-Khaissi, Tiago Pi-
mentel, Michael Gasser, William Abbott Lane,
Mohit Raj, Matt Coler, Jaime Rafael Montoya
Samame, Delio Siticonatzi Camaiteri, Esaú Zu-
maeta Rojas, Didier López Francis, Arturo Once-
vay, Juan López Bautista, Gema Celeste Silva Vil-
legas, Lucas Torroba Hennigen, Adam Ek, David
Guriel, Peter Dirix, Jean-Philippe Bernardy, An-
drey Scherbakov, Aziyana Bayyr-ool, Antonios
Anastasopoulos, Roberto Zariquiey, Karina Sheifer,
Sofya Ganieva, Hilaria Cruz, Ritván Karahó ˇga,
Stella Markantonatou, George Pavlidis, Matvey Plu-
garyov, Elena Klyachko, Ali Salehi, Candy An-
gulo, Jatayu Baxi, Andrew Krizhanovsky, Natalia
Krizhanovskaya, Elizabeth Salesky, Clara Vania, Sar-
dana Ivanova, Jennifer White, Rowan Hall Maud-
slay, Josef Valvoda, Ran Zmigrod, Paula Czarnowska,
Irene Nikkarinen, Aelita Salchak, Brijesh Bhatt,
Christopher Straughn, Zoey Liu, Jonathan North
Washington, Yuval Pinter, Duygu Ataman, Marcin
Wolinski, Totok Suhardijanto, Anna Yablonskaya,
Niklas Stoehr, Hossep Dolatian, Zahroh Nuriah,
Shyam Ratan, Francis M. Tyers, Edoardo M.
Ponti, Grant Aiton, Aryaman Arora, Richard J.
Hatcher, Ritesh Kumar, Jeremiah Young, Daria
Rodionova, Anastasia Yemelina, Taras Andrushko,
Igor Marchenko, Polina Mashkovtseva, Alexandra
Serova, Emily Prud’hommeaux, Maria Nepomni-
ashchaya, Fausto Giunchiglia, Eleanor Chodroff,
Mans Hulden, Miikka Silfverberg, Arya D. Mc-
Carthy, David Yarowsky, Ryan Cotterell, Reut Tsar-
faty, and Ekaterina Vylomova. 2022. UniMorph 4.0:
Universal Morphology. In Proceedings of the Thir-
teenth Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence, pages 840–855, Marseille, France. European
Language Resources Association.
David W Braithwaite, Aryn A Pyke, and Robert S
Siegler. 2017. A computational model of fraction
arithmetic. Psychol. Rev., 124(5):603–625.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens
Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Language models are few-shot learners. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Kartik Chandra, Tzu-Mao Li, Rachit Nigam, Joshua
Tenenbaum, and Jonathan Ragan-Kelley. 2024. From
‘why?’ to ‘wat!’: Explaining perplexing programs by
debugging mental models. In PLATEAU Workshop.
10
13292

--- PAGE 11 ---

Alicia M Chen, Andrew Palacci, Natalia Vélez, Robert
Hawkins, and Samuel J Gershman. 2022. Learning
to teach, teaching to learn.
Albert Corbett. 2001. Cognitive computer tutors: Solv-
ing the Two-Sigma problem. In User Modeling 2001,
pages 137–147. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Albert T Corbett and John R Anderson. 1994. Knowl-
edge tracing: Modeling the acquisition of procedu-
ral knowledge. User Model. User-adapt Interact. ,
4(4):253–278.
Anca D. Dragan, Kenton C.T. Lee, and Siddhartha S.
Srinivasa. 2013. Legibility and predictability of robot
motion. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Human-Robot Interaction ,
HRI ’13, page 301–308. IEEE Press.
Michael C. Frank and Noah D. Goodman. 2012. Predict-
ing pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science,
336(6084):998–998.
Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Stuart J Russell, Pieter Abbeel,
and Anca Dragan. 2016. Cooperative inverse rein-
forcement learning. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
RK Hambelton and M Jodoin. 2003. Item response
theory: models and features.
Ronald K. Hambleton and Hariharan Swaminathan.
1981. Journal of Educational Measurement ,
18(3):178–180.
Enkelejda Kasneci, Kathrin Sessler, Stefan Küche-
mann, Maria Bannert, Daryna Dementieva, Frank
Fischer, Urs Gasser, Georg Groh, Stephan Günne-
mann, Eyke Hüllermeier, Stephan Krusche, Gitta
Kutyniok, Tilman Michaeli, Claudia Nerdel, Jür-
gen Pfeffer, Oleksandra Poquet, Michael Sailer, Al-
brecht Schmidt, Tina Seidel, Matthias Stadler, Jochen
Weller, Jochen Kuhn, and Gjergji Kasneci. 2023.
Chatgpt for good? on opportunities and challenges of
large language models for education. Learning and
Individual Differences, 103:102274.
Belinda Z Li, Alex Tamkin, Noah Goodman, and Jacob
Andreas. 2023. Eliciting human preferences with
language models.
Smitha Milli and Anca D Dragan. 2019. Literal or
pedagogic human? analyzing human model misspec-
ification in objective learning.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe,
Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2022. Rethinking the role of demonstrations:
What makes in-context learning work? In Proceed-
ings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 11048–11064,
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Chris Piech, Jonathan Spencer, Jonathan Huang, Surya
Ganguli, Mehran Sahami, Leonidas J. Guibas, and
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. 2015. Deep knowledge trac-
ing. CoRR, abs/1506.05908.
Anna N Rafferty, Emma Brunskill, Thomas L Grif-
fiths, and Patrick Shafto. 2016. Faster teaching via
POMDP planning. Cogn. Sci., 40(6):1290–1332.
Anna N Rafferty, Michelle M LaMar, and Thomas L
Griffiths. 2015. Inferring learners’ knowledge from
their actions. Cogn. Sci., 39(3):584–618.
Swarnadeep Saha, Peter Hase, and Mohit Bansal. 2023.
Can language models teach weaker agents? teacher
explanations improve students via personalization.
Maarten Sap, Ronan LeBras, Daniel Fried, and Yejin
Choi. 2023. Neural theory-of-mind? on the limits of
social intelligence in large lms.
Melanie Sclar, Sachin Kumar, Peter West, Alane Suhr,
Yejin Choi, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2023. Minding lan-
guage models’ (lack of) theory of mind: A plug-and-
play multi-character belief tracker.
Patrick Shafto, Noah D Goodman, and Thomas L Grif-
fiths. 2014. A rational account of pedagogical rea-
soning: teaching by, and learning from, examples.
Cogn. Psychol., 71:55–89.
Megha Srivastava and Noah Goodman. 2021. Question
generation for adaptive education. In Proceedings
of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 692–701, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Theodore R Sumers, Robert D Hawkins, Mark K Ho,
and Thomas L Griffiths. 2021. Extending rational
models of communication from beliefs to actions.
Joshua Tenenbaum. 1999. Rules and similarity in con-
cept learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 12. MIT Press.
Saujas Vaduguru, Kevin Ellis, and Yewen Pu. 2022. Ef-
ficient pragmatic program synthesis with informative
specifications.
Rose E. Wang, Qingyang Zhang, Carly Robinson, Su-
sanna Loeb, and Dorottya Demszky. 2023. Bridging
the novice-expert gap via models of decision-making:
A case study on remediating math mistakes.
Michael V Yudelson, Kenneth R Koedinger, and Geof-
frey J Gordon. 2013. Individualized bayesian knowl-
edge tracing models. In Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Lecture notes in computer science, pages
171–180. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidel-
berg.
Xiaojin Zhu, Adish Singla, Sandra Zilles, and Anna N
Rafferty. 2018. An overview of machine teaching.
11
13293

--- PAGE 12 ---

Data 
Targets 
f?
Adaptation of Teaching Examples to Simulated Students’ Misconceptions: Functions
GPT-4 ATOM Non-Adaptive: KnownGPT-4: Known
Number of Datapoints
b-learnerf-learner
Number of Datapoints Number of Datapoints Number of Datapoints
Figure 7: Plot showing whether chosen teaching examples target learning f (i.e., when wug(x) is undefined) or
a*x+b (i.e., what wug(x) computes when defined) for the function task. A y-value of 1.0 indicates that the teaching
example targetsf; 0.0 indicates that it does not. An input x for which wug(x) is undefined targetsf, and an input
for which wug(x) is defined targetsa*x+b. Intuitively,f-learners benefit more from seeing examples targetingf
early on in teaching, and b-learners benefit more from seeing examples that targeta*x+b. Error regions indicate
standard errors of the mean.
Adaptation of Teaching Examples to Simulated Students’ Misconceptions
Fractions VerbsFunctions
Data 
Targets 
Unknown 
Concept?
Number of Datapoints Number of Datapoints
GPT4 Non-Adaptive
GPT4 Non-Adaptive
ATOM
Number of Datapoints
Unknown Student:
Known Student:
Figure 8: Plot showing whether chosen teaching examples across experiments target student misconceptions. A
y-value of 1.0 indicates that the teaching example targets misconceptions; 0.0 indicates that it does not. For
fractions, multiplication problems with common denominators targetmult-learners’ misconceptions, and addition
problems with different denominators target add-learners’ misconceptions. For functions, inputs x for which
f(x) returns True targetf-learners’ misconceptions, and inputs for whichf(x) returns False targetb-learners’
misconceptions. For verbs, inputs with class “unknown” by the student ( e.g., a +ied verb for a +ied-learner)
target the student’s misconception. Error regions indicate standard errors of the mean.
A Do teaching examples target student
misconceptions?
For the simulated evaluations, we analyze whether
the examples selected by different teaching meth-
ods target students’ specific misconceptions.
Functions Figure 7 shows whether the selected
teaching examples target learningf ora*x+b in the
targetwug concept, split by student type. We expect
an adaptive teacher to select examples targetingf
for f-learners at the start of learning, and simi-
larly for examples targetinga*x+b forb-learners.
In both plots, we see that the optimal teacher
NON-ADAPTIVE -KNOWN , which assumes access
to the ground truth student type, exhibits the ex-
pected behavior: It selects more examples targeting
f for the f-learner than for the b-learner at the
beginning of the teaching interaction. ATOM, de-
spite needing to maintain guesses for the student
type, shows similar adaptivity to students’ priors
early on, selecting more examples targeting f for
thef-learner than for theb-learner at the start
of teaching.
GPT-4-K NOWN also shows this adaptivity when
assuming the true student type. However, when it
does not have access to the true student type, it does
not show this adaptation; the data selection patterns
of GPT-4 are highly similar for the b-learners
and f-learners, suggesting that GPT-4 struggles
with doing implicit adaptation online.
All Tasks Figure 8 shows adaptation of teaching
examples across all tasks and student types. We
observe similar trends: Across tasks, ATOM shows
12
13294

--- PAGE 13 ---

similar levels of adaptivity to NON-ADAPTIVE -
KNOWN , despite not knowing student type, and
outperforms both GPT-4 methods. We also ob-
serve GPT-4-K NOWN selecting more examples
targeting unknown concepts than GPT-4.
B Creating Function Concepts and
Student Types
b has possible values [1, 2,···, 9] and a has pos-
sible values [−5,−4,···, 4, 5]. For each concept,
to create the b-learner, we uniformly sample the
incorrectb from the range of possible values ofb,
excluding the targetb; to create thef-learner, we
uniformly sample the incorrect f from a set of spu-
riously associated functions: These possible values
are shown in Table 5. The full list of concepts and
incorrect student beliefs are shown in Table 4.
C Creating the Verbs Dataset
For the verbs task, we create verb classes with reg
exp matching on their past tense forms. For the
GPT-4 method, we create ground truth outputs by
first checking if a lemma exists in the Unimorph
dataset; if not, we use a Python verb inflection pack-
age pyinflect12 to first get the past tense form of
the verb, then categorize it. Table 1 shows verb
classes and corresponding counts in the resulting
dataset.
The model that we fit on the full dataset (to de-
rive the parameters of the target concept) obtains a
predictive accuracy of 95.47%, and the mean prob-
ability of the ground truth outputs across the full
dataset is 0.945.
D Simulated Experiments
For all tasks, we obtain predictions from simulated
students by sampling from their predictive distribu-
tions.
Program Tasks For the programmatic tasks
(functions, fractions), each simulated student’s
prior belief in a program h is proportional to the
number of “special primitives” that appear in the
program. We derive the prior over programs by
multiplying a value c by the number of special
primitives that appear in a program to get values
for all programs; we then normalize these values to
get a distribution over programs.
The simulated students for the function and frac-
tion tasks also maintain a noise parameter that
12https://github.com/bjascob/pyInflect
governs how noisy the labels are in the examples
they observe; this noise parameter governs their
posterior updates. For fractions, this noise parame-
ter is 0.8, and for functions, it is 0.05. We use the
same noise values for the teacher’s models of the
students.
Fractions Table 2 shows the multiplication and
addition sub-programs that are used to create
the concept space for simulated students for the
fraction task. For the mult-learner who over-
generalizes the procedure for addition, the “spe-
cial primitives” are (1), (4), and (6). For the
add-learner who over-generalizes the procedure
for multiplication, the “special primitives” are (2),
(3), and (5). We use a value ofc = 1e5.
Functions For b-learners, the “special primi-
tives” are the targetf and spurious b (and so pro-
grams with either of these primitives would have
higher prior beliefs; programs having both the tar-
getf and spuriousb would have the highest prior
belief). Similarly, forf-learners, the incorrectf
and target b are the special primitives. We use a
value ofc = 1e4.
E GPT-4: Details
Prompts for GPT-4 are shown in Tables 6, 7, and
8 for fractions, Tables 9, 10, and 11 for functions,
and Tables 12, 13, and 14 for verbs. An exam-
ple conversation between GPT-4 and a simulated
student is shown in Table 15.
Processing/Filtering GPT-4 Outputs In order
to control for the fact that GPT-4 may generate in-
correct outputs for examples, we use ground truth
outputs for generated inputs. We parse GPT-4 -
generated messages to obtain inputs, then compute
ground truth labels for those inputs and append
them to the message history, starting with “That’s
correct/incorrect.” If a message cannot be parsed,
we append a canned response, i.e., “Sorry, I could
not learn from that example. I can only learn from
examples that are formatted as... ”(if no output can
be parsed from the message) or “I would like to
keep learning. Can I have another example?” (if
no input can be parsed from the message); these
messages do not count as an “interaction” in com-
paring against other teaching methods. For human
experiments, we do not display these canned re-
sponses to the students and instead only display
messages asking for predictions on examples and
providing ground truth answers.
13
13295

--- PAGE 14 ---

Verb Class Description Example Counts
+ed add ‘ed’to the lemma clasp 6,130
+d add ‘d’to the lemma smile 13,463
+ied replace last ‘y’with ‘ied’ cry 1,056
+consonant+ed double last consonant, add ‘ed’ stop 1,878
Table 1: Verb classes and corresponding dataset counts for the verb conjugation task (§3.1).
Addition Sub-Programs
(1) (2) (3)
add numerators & denominators
if denominators are equal:
make common denominators add numerators
add numerators else:
add numerators & denominators
Multiplication Sub-Programs
(4) (5) (6)
multiply numerators & denoms
if denominators are equal:
make common denominators multiply numerators
multiply numerators else:
multiply numerators & denominators
Table 2: The addition and multiplication sub-programs in the concept space for the fraction task in ADAPT (§3).
The sub-programs in the target concept (i.e., correct sub-programs for adding/multiplying fractions) are bolded.
Fractions Functions
Learning Curves: Simulated Students’ Likelihood of Target Concept
ProbabilityLog PDF
GPT4Rank Non-AdaptiveRandom
GPT4Rank Non-Adaptive
ATOMUnknown Student:
Known Student:
multiplication learner addition learner b learner f learner
+d learner+ed learner+consonant+ed learner+ied learner
Verbs
Figure 9: Learning curves for simulated students. Top row: results for function learning and fraction arithmetic,
with y-axis showing the probability of the target concept. Bottom row: results for verb conjugation, with y-axis
showing the log PDF of the target concept. Each subplot corresponds to a different student type. Color indicates
teaching method. Linestyles indicate whether the true student type is assumed (dashed=unknown, solid=known).
Confidence intervals indicate standard error of the mean.
Decoding For all experiments with GPT-4 , we
use a temperature of 0.5 and maximum tokens of
100.
F Human Experiments
F.1 Set-Up
Post-Processing We filter and rerun any experi-
ments where the chat messages were logged out of
order or sent twice.
Hyperparameters ATOM uses a noise parame-
ter value of 0.02 for modeling simulated students.
Instructions An example of hints given to the
human participants is shown in Table 3. The full
set of instructions shown to human participants,
along with the interface, are shown in Figures 12/13
(instructions), 14 (chat), and 15 (end).
Bonus Compensation Participants are told that
their bonus depends on two things:
14
13296

--- PAGE 15 ---

Dr. Smith spent a bunch of time studying this machine. She figured out that when wug is defined, it
computes a function of the form a*x+b, where a and b are constant numbers, so you only need to figure
out what a and b are.
She also left a note with some thoughts:
I’m pretty sure, but not totally confident, that:
1) wug is undefined when inputs are greater than 2
2) When wug is defined, b = 3
–Dr. Smith
Dr. Smith is quite familiar with wug, so her note should give you a good place to start! But keep in
mind that it is possible that she is wrong.
Table 3: An example of a hint given to a human learner. (1) is correct, while (2) is not, thus creating ab-learner.
1. Accuracy ofwug guesses: Participants are told
they will receive 0.05 for every 10 seconds
of the teaching interaction that their guess is
correct, with partial compensation if onlyf or
only a/b is correct.
2. Accuracy of predictions on teaching examples:
Participants are told they will receive up to an
additional 1.00 based on the accuracy of their
predictions.
As shown in Figure 13, participants are
prompted to indicate their understanding of what
their bonus depends on.
F.2 Additional Results
Figure 16 shows the learning efficiency of human
students by student type. Figure 17 shows the cor-
rectness of wug guesses by component as a func-
tion of time. Figure 18 shows the AUCs of wug
correctness by component for individual partici-
pants. Figure 19 shows the accuracy of student
type predictions over time.
Correctness of Simulated Student 
Predictions on Teaching Examples
Fractions Functions Verbs
Number of Datapoints
Prediction 
Correctness
Figure 10: Correctness of simulated student predictions
on teaching examples by task. Error regions indicate
95% confidence intervals.
F.3 Combining GPT-4 and AT OM
We run an experiment combining GPT-4 and
ATOM in the following way: We use ATOM to
make inferences about student type, then prompt
GPT-4 with ATOM’s inference by updating the
system prompt to GPT-4 after each prediction
made by the student. Before any predictions are
given, GPT-4 is prompted with both student types
(i.e., with the prompt given to the teacher that does
not know student type). We call this method GPT-
4+ATOM.
Results are shown in Figure 20. We find that
GPT-4 +ATOM outperforms RANDOM (p< 0.05
using a paired t-test) but does not outperform GPT-
4 or ATOM.
15
13297

--- PAGE 16 ---

Random
[Known] GPT4
Non-Adaptive
[Known] Non-Adaptive
Adaptive
[Known] Rank
Rank
GPT4
Random
[Known] GPT4
Non-Adaptive
[Known] Non-Adaptive
Adaptive
[Known] Rank
Rank
GPT4
Critical Example Selection by Teaching Methods
Target: divisible_3 
Spurious: divisible_6 
Ex: [-15, -9, -3, 3, 9, 15]
Target: divisible_4 
Spurious: divisible_8 
Ex: [-20, -12, -4, 4, 12, 20]
Target: greater_2 
Spurious: greater_1 
Ex: [2]
Target: greater_2 
Spurious: greater_3 
Ex: [3]
Target: greater_2 
Spurious: greater_4 
Ex: [3, 4]
Target: positive 
Spurious: greater_1 
Ex: [1]
Target: positive 
Spurious: greater_2 
Ex: [1, 2]
Target: greater_7 
Spurious: greater_9 
Ex: [8, 9]
Target: greater_7 
Spurious: greater_8 
Ex: [8]
Target: greater_7 
Spurious: greater_5 
Ex: [6, 7]
Teaching Methods: 
Unknown vs Known 
Student Type
Number of Datapoints Number of Datapoints Number of Datapoints Number of Datapoints Number of Datapoints
Figure 11: Full results for critical example selection by different teaching methods for the function task. Results
are for simulated f-learners, who have a spurious belief about f that agrees with the target f on all but a few
examples, as labeled. The opacity of each square corresponds to the mean value of whether the example chosen by
the teaching method at that step in learning is a “critical example” (averaged across experimental conditions: seed
and concepts). See §5.4 for details.
Target Incorrect Used in
f a b f b Human Experiments?
even 1 7 divisible_6 5
even -5 5 divisible_6 7 Y
even 3 8 divisible_4 3 Y
greater_2 1 7 greater_4 3
greater_2 -5 5 greater_1 6
greater_2 3 8 greater_3 5 Y
prime 1 7 odd 2 Y
prime -5 5 odd 9 Y
prime 3 8 odd 6
divisible_3 1 7 divisible_6 6
divisible_3 -5 5 divisible_6 9
divisible_3 3 8 divisible_6 5
divisible_4 1 7 divisible_8 1
divisible_4 -5 5 divisible_8 8 Y
divisible_4 3 8 divisible_8 9 Y
positive 1 7 greater_2 4
positive -5 5 greater_2 2
positive 3 8 greater_1 4
odd 1 7 divisible_5 3 Y
odd -5 5 prime 2 Y
odd 3 8 divisible_3 6 Y
greater_7 1 7 greater_9 2
greater_7 -5 5 greater_8 6 Y
greater_7 3 8 greater_5 6
Table 4: The target concepts and incorrect beliefs used in the function learning experiments. The target f, a, b
define the concepts being taught. The incorrect f is the belief that the f-learners have about f at the start of
learning, and the incorrectb is the value that theb-learners believesb to be.
16
13298

--- PAGE 17 ---

By entering your Prolific ID below, you are participating in a study being performed by computer scientists inthe MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and are agreeing to the following:
You must be at least 18 years old to participate. Your participation in this research is voluntary.You may decline to answer any or all of the following questions. You may decline further participation, atany time, without adverse consequences.Your anonymity is assured; the researchers who have requested your participation will not receive anypersonal information about you.
Once you click submit, you will not be able to come back to this page.
Enter your Prolific ID:  Submit
Mystery Machine Study
Introduction
5/6/24, 8:46 AM Mystery Machine Study
128.30.64.44:8089 1/1
Goal
In this study, we are researching the way that people learn from examples. You will be tasked with learningwhat a mystery machine called wug does. This machine takes in numbers and outputs numbers; wug(x)=ymeans that when wug takes in number x, it outputs y. However, it only works for some numbers and isundefined for others. Your task is to learn on what inputs wug is undefined, and when it is defined, what itdoes.
For example, suppose that you were instead learning about a machine vug that operated on letters instead ofnumbers. Suppose you saw the following sequence of examples: vug(A)=B, vug(B)=undefined, vug(E)=F,vug(I)=J. This data might suggest that vug is undefined on consonants and, when defined (on vowels),returns the next letter in the alphabet.
Next
Mystery Machine Study
Task
5/6/24, 8:31 AM Mystery Machine Study
128.30.64.44:8089/task1 1/1
Details
You will be interacting with a teacher through achat interface, shown on the right. The teacherwill show you examples of what wug does ondifferent numbers, first asking you what youthink wug outputs on a given input, and thenproviding the true output. Your goal is to figureout what wug does as quickly as possible.
Throughout the teaching interaction, you canprovide your guess of what you think wug doesthrough the sidebar on the right. Your guess willhave two parts:
1. when wug is undefined2. when defined, what it does.
We also provide a calculator to help with anycalculations you may need for your guess.
You will have 10 minutes to learn from theteacher. After that, you will no longer be able tolearn about wug or make guesses. If you get 10predictions correct in a row while talking to the teacher or go through all the teacher's examples before the 10 minutes are up, you will have the optionto end the interaction early.
Back Next
Mystery Machine Study
Task
5/6/24, 8:31 AM Mystery Machine Study
128.30.64.44:8089/task2 1/1
Figure 12: Screens 1-3 (instructions) for the study with human participants.
f Incorrectf Options
prime odd
positive greater_n for n∈[−2,−1,1,2]
even divis_4,divis_6
odd prime, divis_3,divis_5, divis_7
divis_n divis_m where m is the smallest multiple of n or the largest factor of n (if m = 2, this is even)
greater_n greater_m where∥m−n∥<= 2 (if m = 0, this ispositive)
Table 5: Descriptions of how the options for incorrect f beliefs of f-learners are generated for each target f in the
function task. We uniformly sample the incorrect f from the set of options to determine the actual incorrect f belief
for the f-learners.
17
13299

--- PAGE 18 ---

Bonus
You will recive a base pay of $4.00 for this study.In addition, based on your performance at thetask, you will be compensated with a bonusdependent on:
Accuracy of guesses for wug: You willreceive a higher bonus the sooner andlonger you provide a correct guessfor wug. You will receive $0.05 for every10 seconds of the teaching interaction thatyour guess is correct. For example, if youprovided the correct guess for wug 1minute into the teaching interaction andleft it unchanged, you would have a correctguess for 9 minutes, or equivalently 540seconds. Therefore, you would get a bonusof $0.05 ∗ (540/10) ∗ = $2.70. You willreceive partial compensation if only one ofthe two parts is correct, or if you have thecorrect guess submitted for less than 10seconds.
Accuracy of outputs for teacher examples: You will receive up to an additional $1.00 based on how many of your responses to the teacherare correct. For example, in the example teaching interaction in the right image, the participant gave 2/3 answers to the teacher, and so theirbonus would be $1.00 ∗ (2/3) = $0.67.
Therefore, you should aim to provide a guess of what wug does as soon as you think you know, and aim to give the teacher accurate answers. You willnot know if the guesses you submit for wug are correct.
Back Next
Mystery Machine Study
Task
5/6/24, 8:31 AM Mystery Machine Study
128.30.64.44:8089/task3 1/1
Hints about wug
Fortunately, you are not starting from a blank slate. Dr. Smith spent a bunch of time studying this machine.She figured out that when wug is defined, it computes a function of the form a∗x+b, where a and b areconstant numbers, so you only need to figure out what a and b are.
She also left a note with some thoughts:
I'm pretty sure, but not totally confident, that:
1. wug is undefined when inputs are divisible by 32. When wug is defined, b = 8
--Dr. Smith
Dr. Smith is quite familiar with wug, so her note should give you a good place to start! But keep in mind thatit is possible that she is wrong.
We will provide the note for you throughout learning so that you can refer to it. You can also always comeback to the task instructions by using the navigation buttons "Back" and "Next" below.
Back Next
Mystery Machine Study
Task
5/6/24, 8:32 AM Mystery Machine Study
128.30.64.44:8089/task4 1/1
Instruction check
You now have all the information to start learning wug! Before you start, please answer the followingquestions. If you are unsure of the answers, we encourage you to read through the task instructions again.
The bonus depends on:
 (1) Accuracy of predictions I give to the teacher (2) How quickly I guess what wug does Both (1) and (2)
Correct! The correct answer is Both (1) and (2).
True or False: Multiple guesses for wug are allowed.
 True False
Correct! The correct answer is True. Multiple guesses are allowed.
Submit
Press "Next" to enter the chat interface. There, you will have the opportunity to familiarize yourself with thelayout before learning begins and the timer starts. After you press "I Am Ready" on the next page, you willinteract with the teacher for 10 minutes.
Back Next
Mystery Machine Study
Task
5/6/24, 8:32 AM Mystery Machine Study
128.30.64.44:8089/task5 1/1
Figure 13: Screens 4-6 (instructions) for the study with human participants.
18
13300

--- PAGE 19 ---

Back
Accuracy of Predictions:Streak:12345678910
Press "I Am Ready" when you are ready to start learning. After that,the timer will begin, and you will have 10 minutes to interact withthe teacher and submit guesses. You are encouraged to play aroundwith the interface before beginning.
I Am Ready
Type your message here... Send
Mystery Machine Study
Chat
You can use this calculator tohelp you figure out wug; it willnot affect your bonus.
Remember: Multiple guesses areallowed, and you can get partialcredit for getting only one partof wug correct. The sooner youhave the correct guess for wug,the higher your bonus.
Make a guess about wug
(1) wug(x) is undefined when input x is:
--
(2) when defined, wug(x) computes a∗x+b
where: a=- b=- 
Calculator for a∗x+b where:
a=- b=- OR Reset to Guess
x= 0  Result:
I'm pretty sure, but not totally confident, that:
1. wug is undefined when inputs are divisible by 32. When wug is defined, b = 8
--Dr. Smith
Timer: 10:00
5/6/24, 8:32 AM Chat Interface
128.30.64.44:8089/chat 1/1
Back
Accuracy of Predictions: 1/3Streak:12345678910
Teacher
You
Teacher
You
Teacher
You
Teacher
What is wug(2)?
8
That's incorrect. wug(2)=14. What is wug(4)?
20
That's correct. What is wug(6)?
undefined
That's incorrect. wug(6)=26. What is wug(8)?
Type your message here... Send
Mystery Machine Study
Chat
You can use this calculator tohelp you figure out wug; it willnot affect your bonus.
Remember: Multiple guesses areallowed, and you can get partialcredit for getting only one partof wug correct. The sooner youhave the correct guess for wug,the higher your bonus.
Make a guess about wug
(1) wug(x) is undefined when input x is:
--
(2) when defined, wug(x) computes a∗x+b
where: a=- b=- 
Calculator for a∗x+b where:
a=3 b=8 OR Reset to Guess
x= 4  Result: 3∗x+8=20
I'm pretty sure, but not totally confident, that:
1. wug is undefined when inputs are divisible by 32. When wug is defined, b = 8
--Dr. Smith
Timer: 09:26
5/6/24, 8:33 AM Chat Interface
128.30.64.44:8089/chat 1/1
Figure 14: The chat interface for the study with human participants.
19
13301

--- PAGE 20 ---

A) Was Dr. Smith's note right?
I'm pretty sure, but not totally confident, that:
1. wug is undefined when inputs are divisible by 32. When wug is defined, b = 8
--Dr. Smith
Hint (1) was:
 Correct  Incorrect  I don't know
Hint (2) was:
 Correct  Incorrect  I don't know
B) Did Dr. Smith's note influence what you thought wug did?
 Yes  No
C) Was there anything you found confusing or did not understand throughoutthe study, or any other issues that you encountered?
Submit
Mystery Machine Study
Exit Questions
5/6/24, 8:34 AM Mystery Machine Study
128.30.64.44:8089/check 1/1
You have finished the study. Thank you for participating! Here is your completion code: C166E0FJ
The correct answer was:
1. wug is undefined when inputs are odd2. When wug is defined, it computes a∗x+b where a = 3 and b = 8
If you have questions about this research, please contact us at alexisro@mit.edu. We will be in touch aboutyour bonus.
Mystery Machine Study
5/6/24, 8:34 AM Mystery Machine Study
128.30.64.44:8089/end 1/1
Figure 15: Post-chat end screens for the study with human participants.
b-learnerf-learner
wug partial 
correctness AUC
Function Results by Human Student Type
RandomGPT-4ATOM RandomGPT-4ATOM
*
*
Figure 16: Results showing how efficiently human students guessed the correct wug concept (§6.2), by student
type. Stars indicate statistically significant results under a paired t-test: For f-learners,p< 0.05 for RANDOM v.s.
ATOM and for R ANDOM v.s. GPT-4. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.
Minutes of Teaching Interaction Minutes of Teaching InteractionMinutes of Teaching Interaction
a
Correctness of Human Guesses for Components of wug
bf
Correctness
GPT-4Random ATOM
Figure 17: Correctness of humans’ guesses ofwug, split by components and as a function of time spent interacting
with the teacher. Error regions show 95% confidence intervals.
20
13302

--- PAGE 21 ---

Correctness of Human Guesses for Components of wug: 
 AUCs of Individual Participants
b correctnessa correctnessf correctnesswug partial correctness
GPT-4 ATOMRandom GPT-4 ATOMRandom GPT-4 ATOMRandom GPT-4 ATOMRandom
Figure 18: Correctness of guesses of wug for individual human participants. Each dot shows the AUC of the curve
of the metric’s correctness over time for an individual participant.
Accuracy of Inferences about Human Students
GPT-4
ATOM
Minutes of Teaching Interaction
Accuracy
Figure 19: Accuracy of teaching methods’ predictions of student type with human learners (§6.3). Error regions
show 95% confidence intervals.
RandomGPT-4ATOMGPT-4 
+ 
ATOM
Function Results with 
Human Students
wug partial 
correctness AUC
*
*
*
Figure 20: Results with human students showing how efficiently students guessed the correctwug concept (§6.2).
Stars indicate statistically significant results under a paired t-test. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.
21
13303

--- PAGE 22 ---

You are GPT-teacher, an expert teacher. Your goal is to teach a student how to multiply and add
fractions as efficiently as possible with helpful examples.
You will be interacting with a student who has spent some time with fraction arithmetic but still has
some misconceptions about how it works. The student you will be interacting with is a student who
performs multiplication correctly, but tends to incorrectly add both numerators and denominators when
adding fractions, especially when denominators are different .
Please make sure to follow these instructions:
- You are only allowed to give students example fraction problems, and ask them to guess the outputs.
You may not explain any concepts to them directly, or ask any other questions. Anything other than
example fraction problems and answers will be ignored by the student.
- The student has not learned how to simplify fractions yet, so please do not simplify the fractions in
your examples. Leave the answers in their unsimplified form. The student will also not simplify their
answer.
- Please only use fractions with positive numerators and denominators.
- Do not teach arithmetic with mixed numbers or whole numbers.
- Only teach fraction addition and multiplication. Please format input/output examples as: a/b+c/d=e/f
for addition or a/b*c/d=e/f for multiplication.
- Keep teaching with fraction problems and outputs until the student says they would like to stop, even
if you think you have covered the full input range.
For example, your interactions will look like the following, where capital words indicate placeholders
for actual verb lemmas and categories:
Your interactions will look like the following (where letters are placeholders for actual numbers):
System: What is a/b+c/d?
User: a/b+c/d=e/f
System: That’s [correct/incorrect]. a/b+c/d=x/y. What is g/h+i/j?
Please start by asking the student for their guess on a fraction example.
Table 6: System prompt to GPT-4-K NOWN for the fraction task (known student type). Bolded words indicate
variables that change between student types.
22
13304

--- PAGE 23 ---

You are GPT-teacher, an expert teacher. Your goal is to teach a student how to multiply and add
fractions as efficiently as possible with helpful examples.
You will be interacting with a student who has spent some time with fraction arithmetic but still has
some misconceptions about how it works. There are 2 kinds of students:
1) Students who perform addition correctly, but tend to incorrectly multiply only numerators when
multiplying fractions, especially when the denominators are equal; if the denominators are not equal,
the student sometimes makes common denominators and then multiplies the numerators
2) Students who perform multiplication correctly, but tend to incorrectly add both numerators and
denominators when adding fractions, especially when denominators are different
You should try to figure out which kind of student you are interacting with and then teach them
accordingly.
Please make sure to follow these instructions:
- You are only allowed to give students example fraction problems, and ask them to guess the outputs.
You may not explain any concepts to them directly, or ask any other questions. Anything other than
example fraction problems and answers will be ignored by the student.
- The student has not learned how to simplify fractions yet, so please do not simplify the fractions in
your examples. Leave the answers in their unsimplified form. The student will also not simplify their
answer.
- Please only use fractions with positive numerators and denominators.
- Do not teach arithmetic with mixed numbers or whole numbers.
- Only teach fraction addition and multiplication. Please format input/output examples as: a/b+c/d=e/f
for addition or a/b*c/d=e/f for multiplication.
- Keep teaching with fraction problems and outputs until the student says they would like to stop, even
if you think you have covered the full input range.
For example, your interactions will look like the following, where capital words indicate placeholders
for actual verb lemmas and categories:
Your interactions will look like the following (where letters are placeholders for actual numbers):
System: What is a/b+c/d?
User: a/b+c/d=e/f
System: That’s [correct/incorrect]. a/b+c/d=x/y. What is g/h+i/j?
Please start by asking the student for their guess on a fraction example.
Table 7: System prompt to GPT-4 for the fraction task (unknown student type).
Based on this interaction, which kind of student do you think I was at the start of this teaching
session:
1) Students who perform addition correctly, but tend to incorrectly multiply only numerators when
multiplying fractions, especially when the denominators are equal; if the denominators are not equal,
the student sometimes makes common denominators and then multiplies the numerators
2) Students who perform multiplication correctly, but tend to incorrectly add both numerators and
denominators when adding fractions, especially when denominators are different
Please select (1) or (2).
Table 8: System prompt to GPT-4 for inferring student type for the fraction task.
23
13305

--- PAGE 24 ---

You are GPT-teacher, an expert teacher. Your goal is to teach a student what a mystery machine called
wug does. This machine takes in numbers and outputs numbers. However, it only works for some numbers
and is undefined for others. Your goal is to teach the student on what inputs wug is undefined, and
when it is defined, what it does. You should do so as efficiently as possible with helpful input/output
examples, such as edge cases.
The wug machine works as follows: wug(x) is undefined when x is greater than 2 . When defined, wug(x)
computes x+7.
You’re going to be interacting with a student who is learning how wug works. The student knows that
wug is sometimes undefined. The student also knows that when wug is defined, it computes something of
the form a*x+b. In the real wug machine, a=1 and b=7. However, the student does not know this. The
student only knows that a is a constant number between -5 and 5 (inclusive) and that b is a constant
number between 1 and 9 (inclusive).
The student knows that wug is undefined when the input is one of the following:
- prime
- positive
- even
- odd
- divisible by n for n between 3 and 20 (inclusive)
- greater than n for n between 1 and 20 (inclusive)
Students have varying previous exposure to wug, and so they understand different parts of how wug works.
The student you will be interacting with is a student who correctly thinks that b=7 but incorrectly
thinks that wug is undefined when inputs are greater than 4 .
Please make sure to follow these instructions:
- You are only allowed to give students example inputs, and ask them to guess outputs. You may not
explain aspects of the concept to them directly, or ask any other questions. Anything other than inputs
and outputs will be ignored by the student.
- Please format input/output examples as: wug(INPUT)=ANSWER
- wug only works for numbers between -20 to 20 (inclusive), so restrict the inputs you choose to that
range. Any inputs outside of that range will be ignored by the student.
- Keep teaching with inputs and outputs until the student says they would like to stop, even if you
think you have covered the full input range.
For example, your interactions will look like the following, where capital words indicate placeholders
for actual numbers:
Your interactions will look like the following:
System: What is wug(INPUT)?
User: wug(INPUT)=GUESS
System: That’s [correct/incorrect]. wug(INPUT)=ANSWER. What is wug(NEW INPUT)?
Please start by asking the student for their guess on an input.
Table 9: System prompt to GPT-4-K NOWN for the function task (known student type). Bolded words indicate
variables that change between student types and target concepts.
24
13306

--- PAGE 25 ---

You are GPT-teacher, an expert teacher. Your goal is to teach a student what a mystery machine called
wug does. This machine takes in numbers and outputs numbers. However, it only works for some numbers
and is undefined for others. Your goal is to teach the student on what inputs wug is undefined, and
when it is defined, what it does. You should do so as efficiently as possible with helpful input/output
examples, such as edge cases.
The wug machine works as follows: wug(x) is undefined when x is greater than 2 . When defined, wug(x)
computes x+7.
You’re going to be interacting with a student who is learning how wug works. The student knows that
wug is sometimes undefined. The student also knows that when wug is defined, it computes something of
the form a*x+b. In the real wug machine, a=1 and b=7. However, the student does not know this. The
student only knows that a is a constant number between -5 and 5 (inclusive) and that b is a constant
number between 1 and 9 (inclusive).
The student knows that wug is undefined when the input is one of the following:
- prime
- positive
- even
- odd
- divisible by n for n between 3 and 20 (inclusive)
- greater than n for n between 1 and 20 (inclusive)
Students have varying previous exposure to wug, and so they understand different parts of how wug works.
There are two kinds of students:
1) Students who correctly think that b=7 but incorrectly think wug is undefined when inputs aregreater
than 4
2) Students who correctly think that wug is undefined when inputs are greater than 2 but incorrectly
think that b=3
Please make sure to follow these instructions:
- You are only allowed to give students example inputs, and ask them to guess outputs. You may not
explain aspects of the concept to them directly, or ask any other questions. Anything other than inputs
and outputs will be ignored by the student.
- Please format input/output examples as: wug(INPUT)=ANSWER
- wug is only defined for numbers between -20 to 20 (inclusive), so restrict the inputs you choose to
that range.
- Keep teaching with inputs and outputs until the student says they would like to stop, even if you
think you have covered the full input range.
For example, your interactions will look like the following, where capital words indicate placeholders
for actual numbers:
Your interactions will look like the following:
System: What is wug(INPUT)?
User: wug(INPUT)=GUESS
System: That’s [correct/incorrect]. wug(INPUT)=ANSWER. What is wug(NEW INPUT)?
Please start by asking the student for their guess on an input.
Table 10: System prompt to GPT-4 for the function task (unknown student type). Bolded words indicate variables
that change between student types and target concepts.
Based on this interaction, which kind of student do you think I was at the start of this teaching
session:
1) Students who correctly think that b=7 but incorrectly think wug is undefined when inputs aregreater
than 4
2) Students who correctly think that wug is undefined when inputs are greater than 2 but incorrectly
think that b=3
Please select (1) or (2).
Table 11: System prompt to GPT-4 for inferring student type for the function task. Bolded words indicate variables
that change between student types and target concepts.
25
13307

--- PAGE 26 ---

You are GPT-teacher, an expert teacher. Your goal is to teach a student how to conjugate English past
tense verbs as efficiently as possible with helpful examples.
Specifically, your goal is to teach students about four categories of past tense verbs:
- ‘+ed’: add ‘ed’ to the verb lemma
- ‘+d’: add ‘d’ to the verb lemma
- ‘y_to_ied’: if the verb lemma ends in a ‘y’, replace the ‘y’ with ‘ied’
- ‘+consonant+ed’: if the verb lemma ends in a consonant, double the last consonant and add ‘ed’
Different students have different confusion points, but each student has one verb category that they
are the least familiar with. The student you will be interacting with is the least familiar with the
‘y_to_ied’ category.
Please make sure to follow these instructions:
- You are only allowed to give students example verb lemmas, and ask them to guess verb categories. You
may not explain any concepts to them directly, or ask any other questions. Anything other than example
verb lemmas and categories will be ignored by the student.
- Please format input/output examples as: ‘LEMMA’ is a ‘CATEGORY’ verb
- Keep teaching until the student says they would like to stop, even if you think they understand the
verb categories.
- You are only allowed to teach students about verbs in the four categories (‘+ed’, ‘+d’, ‘y_to_ied’,
and ‘+consonant+ed’). Please do not give examples from other categories, like irregular verbs.
For example, your interactions will look like the following, where capital words indicate placeholders
for actual verb lemmas and categories:
Your interactions will look like the following:
System: What type of verb is ‘LEMMA’?
User: ‘LEMMA’ is a ‘CATEGORY’ verb
System: That’s [correct/incorrect]. ‘LEMMA’ is a ‘CATEGORY’ verb. What type of verb is ‘LEMMA’?
Please start by asking the student for their guess on a lemma.
Table 12: System prompt to GPT-4-K NOWN for the verb task (known student type). Bolded words indicate
variables that change between student types.
26
13308

--- PAGE 27 ---

You are GPT-teacher, an expert teacher. Your goal is to teach a student how to conjugate English past
tense verbs as efficiently as possible with helpful examples.
Specifically, your goal is to teach students about four categories of past tense verbs:
- ‘+ed’: add ‘ed’ to the verb lemma
- ‘+d’: add ‘d’ to the verb lemma
- ‘y_to_ied’: if the verb lemma ends in a ‘y’, replace the ‘y’ with ‘ied’
- ‘+consonant+ed’: if the verb lemma ends in a consonant, double the last consonant and add ‘ed’
Different students have different confusion points, but each student has one verb category that they
are the least familiar with. While teaching the student, you should aim to infer what verb category
they are the least familiar with in order to teach and correct their misconceptions most efficiently.
Please make sure to follow these instructions:
- You are only allowed to give students example verb lemmas, and ask them to guess verb categories. You
may not explain any concepts to them directly, or ask any other questions. Anything other than example
verb lemmas and categories will be ignored by the student.
- Please format input/output examples as: ‘LEMMA’ is a ‘CATEGORY’ verb
- Keep teaching until the student says they would like to stop, even if you think they understand the
verb categories.
- You are only allowed to teach students about verbs in the four categories (‘+ed’, ‘+d’, ‘y_to_ied’,
and ‘+consonant+ed’). Please do not give examples from other categories, like irregular verbs.
For example, your interactions will look like the following, where capital words indicate placeholders
for actual verb lemmas and categories:
Your interactions will look like the following:
System: What type of verb is ‘LEMMA’?
User: ‘LEMMA’ is a ‘CATEGORY’ verb
System: That’s [correct/incorrect]. ‘LEMMA’ is a ‘CATEGORY’ verb. What type of verb is ‘LEMMA’?
Please start by asking the student for their guess on a lemma.
Table 13: System prompt to GPT-4 for the verb task (unknown student type).
Based on this interaction, which verb category do you think I was the least familiar with at the start
of this teaching session?
Table 14: System prompt to GPT-4 for inferring student type for the verb task.
27
13309

--- PAGE 28 ---

assistant: What is wug(1)?
user: wug(1)=9
assistant: That’s incorrect. wug(1)=8. What is wug(0)?
user: wug(0)=7
assistant: That’s correct. wug(0)=7. What is wug(2)?
user: wug(2)=9
assistant: That’s correct. wug(2)=9. What is wug(3)?
user: wug(3)=10
assistant: That’s incorrect. wug(3)=undefined. What is wug(-1)?
user: wug(-1)=6
assistant: That’s correct. wug(-1)=6. What is wug(-5)?
user: wug(-5)=2
assistant: That’s correct. wug(-5)=2. Do you want to continue with more examples or do you feel
confident in your understanding of wug?
user: I would like to keep learning. Can I have another example?
assistant: What is wug(-10)?
user: wug(-10)=-3
assistant: That’s correct. wug(-10)=-3. What is wug(4)?
user: wug(4)=11
assistant: That’s incorrect. wug(4)=undefined. What is wug(-15)?
user: wug(-15)=-8
assistant: That’s correct. wug(-15)=-8. Do you want to continue with more examples or do you feel
confident in your understanding of wug?
user: I would like to keep learning. Can I have another example?
assistant: What is wug(-20)?
user: wug(-20)=-13
assistant: That’s correct. wug(-20)=-13. What is wug(5)?
user: I would like to stop learning now. Based on this interaction, which kind of student do you think
I was at the start of this teaching session:
1) Students who correctly think that b=7 but incorrectly think wug is undefined when inputs are greater
than 4
2) Students who correctly think that wug is undefined when inputs are greater than 2 but incorrectly
think that b=3
Please select (1) or (2).
assistant: 1
Table 15: An example conversation transcript between GPT-4 and a simulated student for the function task. The
system prompt for this conversation is shown in Table 10.
28
13310